This is Jocko podcast number 364 with Dave Burke and me Jocko willing good evening Dave. Good evening
The misdeeds who volunteered were among the most talented hard-working courageous group of men I have ever encountered
To a man. They were remarkable pilots
They worked long hours days on end to get the program started
During the early missions. We were consumed with establishing procedures
Deciding on tactics constructing our maps testing varied equipment and aircraft configurations and learning the area
It was really hunt and peck trial by fire
We decided on three cycle missions using two in-flight refuelings
We were looking for road traffic storage areas and SAMs, which were beginning to move into the lower parts of the pack
Those early misty missions were really hairy as we experimented with how to survive in a dense triple-a
environment while marking targets and directing strikes
Though facking was not a new concept the US Air Force had employed fax since World War two
fast facking was new and we were truly plowing new ground
We had to learn to operate and survive in a very dense threat environment while operating for extended periods at low altitude
dicey stuff
Our loss rate during the first six months was 42% a steep expensive and tragic learning curve. I
Cannot emphasize too strongly the courage of the first group of men who raised their hands
They were going where no jet pilot had ever been before to do dangerous things. No one had ever done
And that right there is an excerpt from a book book called
Misty which is the book is made up of a bunch of first-person accounts of misty pilots in Vietnam and
that particular account
Was from a man named bud day who was the founder and the first commanding officer of the misty squadron
Which he commanded for about two months before he was shot down. He was captured by the communists
He actually escaped his initial captivity, but he was shot and recaptured
And then he was sent to the Hunnoy Hilton where he spent
Five years and seven months as a POW
Upon his release he was awarded the Medal of Honor
For his personal bravery and his leadership in the face of extreme enemy pressure
But even while he was in captivity
The rest of the squadron the misty pilots they continued on
they flew the
F-100 Super Sabre which is known as the Hunn
There were 157 pilots that served as misty fast facts and facts stands for a forward air controller
They were around from 1967 to 1970
And as forward air controllers that meant they did that from the sky
They were marking targets and directing other aircraft to take out those targets, and it was a very dangerous job
especially because
The misty pilots did a bulk of their flying in North Vietnam where they were exposed to the most intense of the enemy air defenses
and of those
157 pilots
34 were shot down two were shot down twice
23 were recovered
Four were captured by the enemy
seven
were killed in action
But
They were able to accomplish their mission. They were able to get bombs on target destroy
critical enemy nodes and
Deliver a close air support to troops on the ground
And it's an honor to have one of those pilots
With us here tonight to discuss his experiences and his lessons learned his name is dick routine
He served 20 years in the Air Force
and in addition to his
Combat experience he was a test pilot a record setting pilot
He piloted the first plane around the world with no stopping and no refueling. He's also an author
He wrote a book called Voyager and another book
called
The next five minutes
And it's an honor like I said to have him here tonight dick routine dick. Thank you so much for joining us
Well, it's great to be here. I'm a great fan. It's uh
Man when you think about this new mission that you guys picked up and
What it's like to learn
When you're learning curve is you're learning in combat. That's a that's a rough thing to get into
a
Rough way to try and figure things out
Well trial by fire. That's why it's called the initially it was called the Voyager or them
The Misty experience the the Misty
Experiment there we go. Anyway, there's a
There's a thing on PPS. It's very popular now about that that was made up. So about the Misty pilots
Well, it's called Misty the Misty
the Misty experiment
Okay, and PBS. Oh
Well, I haven't seen that one yet, but I'll definitely check that one out because it's
Anytime you're exploring new ground like that and you're doing in a combat situation
That's just that's a scary thing to do and you guys were definitely doing it
So let's before we get into that
Let's let's start at the beginning and about kind of where you came from in the beginning and I'm gonna go to your
So your book you've written two books. This one's called the next five minutes
embracing the impossible and
You say in this book my father Dr. George a routine always said he had an inkling that my life would involve adventure
Even as a baby in diapers. I was exploring our farm in rural Oregon. I
Wanted to see and touch and explore at all looking back
I realized that our parents gave their children a precious gift of freedom to explore the world and experience life
They never held us back from doing anything even if
Some thought it risky or dangerous
My dad lovingly called pop was a product of the Great Depression and a World War two Navy veteran
He took advantage of his VA benefits and put himself through dental school then moved his family to Danuba
Am I saying that right? That's right. I knew that Dianuba a small agricultural heartland town
35 miles southeast of Fresno, California. It was the perfect place to grow up to fly
Cessnas and Piper Cubs to ride motorcycles and to throw toilet paper out of an airplane over the high school during a Friday night football game
While riding my BSA motorcycle. I was often chased out of town by local cops
But usually found a way to ditch them by riding through neighborhood vineyards. I
Knew they couldn't catch me although many tried
I enjoyed the thrill of this count mask count cat mouse game
Even when the officers would caution my parents about my unrulyness. So there's a little glimpse into your
Into your childhood sounds like you were a handful now. It's great. Dianuba was an absolute fantastic place to grow up
at the freedom lot of agriculture and
That's when we learn how to fly
little airplanes and would be
Buzzing and throwing toilet paper out like they said
So what what did your dad do in the Navy?
dad got in at the at the very end of
the of the of the war in fact
He should have been exempt and he called up and there was a mistake someplace and they
They gave me draft notice. He says hey, I'm married and I have a family and I should be exempt and they thought
Well, yeah, you're right
But he says you know something my country's at war. God damn it. I'm gonna go and he did
And so what he do in the Navy?
he was I think he was a corpsman there and
Farragut
Fact that's up where we live right now in Cordelaine, Idaho
by Lake Ponduray and this big huge naval base up there and
That's where he spent the end of the war. He never made it into
Into a ship or into combat or anything
And then he then he uses GI bill to pay for dental school and became a dentist
That's right like many of those vets they took advantage of that and I think it was a probably one of the best investments our country ever made
Yeah, and then you know you met you've already talked to me
We were like two paragraphs into the beginning of the book and you're already talking about flying Cessnas
What was your first experience in a plane?
well
It was right after World War two it's just a little kid I can't remember exactly what it was but my mother
When dad was going through dental school. We didn't have any money and for some reason mom
Took me out to a place called Flea Bob there in Riverside. It's a little grass field and
she
bought an airplane ride for this little kid and
To this day I can remember almost every detail of that experience
We went out there and we're gonna fly and that was pretty neat thing
but then at that time that airport was just a grass field someplace and
It was in a pipe and it's a J5
Piper cub and the back seat was a little wider and then that means that two people could sit there
Okay, well they put mom and I in the back and when I sat out I couldn't see out
You know the windows are too high and I said there's no fine way
That I'm gonna sit in this hole in this experience
so I stood up and and grabbed onto the pilot seat and
It was an old airplane and and I can still remember
the
Stuffing and I can still remember what it smelled like and
I remember that the tires had no tread and
Somebody came out and hand-prop the airplane and got it going
And we accelerated in the big thrill
Lifting off and seeing an entire new world that I had never experienced even existed and
And for that 15 minutes that we flew over Riverside and I still remember the the famous mission in and
Had no idea that later on that I was going to be honored with a set of wings in the flyers wall
but anyway, I looked down and it was so amazing and
And it would what I saw that day would change my life forever
Mom would say her two sons
Had aviation fuel instead of blood and they were not issued birth certificates. They were issued
Fly plants and so it from that moment on it was in an extreme
I guess abnormal
fascination for aviation and
Unfortunately, maybe at the expense of a more rounded character development. I knew a lot about airplanes
everything
As they flew over you could identify which one they were and I knew what kind of motor engines they had and so forth
But the other things to make a rounded experience for growing up. I knew absolutely jack squat about anything
So as you're growing up so you definitely want to be a pilot. Oh, absolutely. Did you want to be a military pilot?
Yes
It took go back a little to go back a little bit more I
grew up in the dawn of the victory of World War two and
This time I became fascinated with aviation and then and I was really fascinated about combat
And I found it very intriguing and as I learned more about
Those guys that flew out of the 8th Air Force in East England in England
And those long missions and B 17s and B 24s and I learned about the loss rates
You know one group would come back and 600 beds would be empty
Who are these people that did that when three four seven were casualties?
And I thought
How in the hell?
You know, it's one thing to go and do that once but if you're the only one that comes back from your whole squadron
Let's wounded on board how and the love of whatever do you get back in another airplane and do that again?
I was fascinated who the hell are these people and
Then you had to ask the question again, you know, I kind of wanted to be a warrior
I
Always thought it was the ultimate in human competition is where the pinnacle is where each other would compete
for the ultimate prize and that's your life and
I would it's fascinated. How can I could I do something like that? And I had to find out one way or another
I had a learning experience a learning problem
It was diagnosed just a few years ago actually
When I was trying to write this book and I was telling people how I read and
How I process things, but it was a
Dislikely
Whatever that is dyslexic and I always had a hard time in school
But that that fascinating that the fascination for whatever the Warriors life was I don't know
Had to find out for myself
Now every young warrior grows up and pretty soon he's a warrior and the time goes by and he becomes the age to be a warrior
Okay, I'm a young guy and I'm in the thing right now
This is warrior and then you walk outside and look around and think well what war am I gonna fight?
It's a small window of opportunity actually and I looked around
Freck it was Vietnam
But I still had to find out and that was something that was kind of gnawing in my in my back
All that time I couldn't wait to do that. I had to find out if little dicky routine can do that and
You know our parents gave us some really important things one of his freedom. There's the world out there
I give you life you can make of it what you want
And remember
Well, my mom would take it to air shows and this was in Mercedes, California. And I was a little kid and
I never forget that I was walking up there and there was an RF-84 a reconnaissance F-84
jet
Smell like a jet curing
And I remember looking in the windows the camera windows and they had scantily clad females in there
And I thought wow this is really cool
And then I saw that pilot standing there and he looked really cool
Man had his G suit on his flight suit on this had his wings and he was a pilot man
And he was a flyer he could go and fly that airplane
And I stood there and looked up at him and my mother
What she said right then was really important kind of a turning place in my life
And my mom look at looked at me and she says dick would you like to do that?
I says oh god what I ever but then I said something the fact that I don't think that I could ever achieve that
And she grabbed me by the neck or the nap and she said in no uncertain terms
Looked at me and she says if you want to do that you can and don't you ever say that you can't do something like that
And that was the the motivation
Like she says you can do if you can dream it you can do it and the only way to fail is if you quit and
To achieve all those things that you dream about all you have to do is manage the motivation
And so on that day and that castle our four space in front of that f-84
She instilled the fact that I
Could really do that
No, is she able to take that focus and get it towards your grades in school?
No according to your book
Problems in school and you just and that was driven somewhat by your dyslexia
It was by dyslexia. Nobody could I nobody could identify it or nobody could evaluate what the hell was Burt was
Dicky having a problem in school. In fact my dad
Right after grade school right after high school. He sent me down to a university
I think in Southern California for an aptitude test. Hey, it's just you know, who is this kid?
Is he what what's his aptitude is? Is he a college type and and whatever and
I went down and took the test and pop came back and says
It scored very very low and
Well like in English is an example communication skills, but I I was very extremely high and mechanical
Very high mechanical aptitude and so then I wasn't going to be a college guy obviously
And not to jump ahead too much, but I went in the Air Force right out of high school and
And it's I was going through advancement and so forth to be a lieutenant colonel
I had to have a college degree so in that time they had a bootstrap program
We talk about motivation again the bootstrap program. So here I am. I'm gonna be a lieutenant colonel
I got about 18 years in the service and they sent me off to
clean killin clean Texas
the American Technological University and for about
A semester or whatever it was three or four or five months and I went out there by myself and
In a little apartment now here this older guy
You know it's been to Vietnam and we've been through the the Cold War and
Nuclear alert and stuff and I'm looking around all these kids out here drinking and racing hill and chasing girls
And I wasn't doing any of that like and dawn on me and I says hey
You know you did have problems with this and I thought this is college. You know, geez
It's always scared of college
Wonder how I'll do and then I thought what the motivation was I got a family and two kids
I need to get promoted and if I don't I'm gonna give up retirement and all those other benefits and stuff and the humility of coming back and
failing this thing and
So I figured out a way I
Got a briefcase and I put a tape recorder in it and I sat down in that seat right in front of that professor
And I didn't have anything else. I wasn't drinking and I wasn't chasing girls or anything
So every every word that he had a wrote
Notes, you know detailed notes of this thing and here this dyslexic kid that had a
problem in any kind of academic situation
he graduated
with
the BS degree on
The Dean's list and a foro average
Holy man has and it's just it's just the motivation
So you can accomplish anything if you can die it through is manage the motivation
If you keep yourself motivated or more or motivate those around you
It's an example of the world flight project. I
Kept thinking and we had some horrible times, you know challenges the five and a half years with no money having to build this big huge
airplane ourselves by hand
The flight test dangerous as hell, I don't know how I ever survived that thing this frail little airplane
It was gonna go 29,000 miles
Wow
And and when things were falling apart and I want to give up
About motivation again, I would go out in a special place in this little
Crummy little airport Mojave abandoned semi-abandoned military field and in Mojave, California
And the high desert next to Edwards Air Force Base and I have a special place that I would sit down in the hangar
by the hangar looking the ramp and looking out over the desert and
And and some you know just insurmountable problem difficulties
And I close my eyes and I would try to imagine what it would feel like to land at Edwards Air Force Base
Having accomplished aviation's last milestone
And I close my eyes and let that feeling permeate through my psychic and I'd realize
This is the last you know the last milestone in aviation the unrefew of world flight
And I think and I'd loud after thinking about that and let it settle into my psychic and thought
You know I'd feel pretty good
I'd feel pretty good and for five and a half years when I was really down and dejected
I'd sit out there and close my eyes and try to visualize that and
Then that was managed managed the motivation
And I found that that's really a key thing and I try to tell people about that you can dream it you can do it
But just manage the motivation and you can accomplish anything
Now as you're growing up you also you got your brother Bert, right right
And it sounds like you two are thick as thieves and everything that you're doing
Well not really we were five years apart. So therefore we were never in the same school at the same time. I was gone
Went to a high school and and being five years apart. I was gone a year and before he even started
So we weren't really all that close I guess in some ways
But you know I guess it seems like you can't you became close later. Well, yeah, we were brothers
He was you know, I was the guy that was riding motorcycles and getting chased by the cops and
buzzing around Friday night high school games and being the long-haired
Elvis Presley haircut with dirty Levi's hanging on the last the last hair of my ass and so forth and
You know, he was the one that was more studious. I think that
that the education thing
The two brothers he got a lot of he got a lot of what I needed to go to school
Of course, I took away from him some of the mechanical part of it
And so forth and that's what so you're growing up in the 50s because you're born in what 30?
38 38 right so you're growing up in the 50s. This is an in California in the 50s Elvis
motorcycles
Levi's jeans like you had the whole thing going on right out of a movie American graffiti. That's it
If you remember that movie, yeah, I mean I thought that they had done American graffiti in my little town
Because all those characters I knew every one of them. Oh, it's a school with him
Now you also mentioned the book that you were scared of heights. Yes. What was that all about?
Ah well phobia well
I call it's Ed's phobia. I think I was really really and my brother and I both have Ed's phobia
If you get I couldn't write in glass elevators or I couldn't look off the tall building or look over a cliff and
I didn't realize
You know I just later on during the the Voyager project is that I thought that phobias were just sissy things
So what you're what are you scared of height not heights, but you're scared of of
What spiders were scared of being in a tight place?
And I just thought that was that was a sissy thing
But it was but the fear of heights it it became a debilitating phobia
that I'd go over next to a cliff or something and
Become cold and clammy uncontrolled shaking extreme heart rates
inability to
in the ragged edge of being panicked and
And so I've had that all my life I guess I just how do you keep cured of that stay the hell away from
High places don't look off big cliffs and stuff and I thought everybody had that
You know you're supposed to be afraid of being high for crying out loud. So I just thought that was normal
until
That particular thing happened
During the stress of our Voyager project
That there was a lot of stress mental stress and stuff for that. You know no money
Trying to do with volunteers people volunteers would not show up. They'd only do half of it and
It was very stressful
especially with no money and
The thing is the hell with it. We're gonna do it anyway. It just it's a neat thing
So I took up and took off in my long easy that I built
One of the first models that my brother designed called long easy
And I took off one day and I did the first turn out of traffic
And it hit me
That debilitating phobia happened to me in flight
I never had any problem in flight just looking over the edge of a cliff and it hit me it hit me so bad
Cold and clammy heart race
Inability to do almost anything
And it skidded the airplane around and finally damn near crashed on the runway trying to get back
And taxied in and then sitting there by myself and the heart rate would slow down
You could kind of relax a little bit
And then I thought holy crap dick. You're right in the middle of the Voyager project. This is your project
You're gonna be the commander. You're gonna be the guy you're gonna be the guy that lands at Eddard's Air Force Base and taxied up
for the whole world
having accomplished this
great
milestone achievement
And I can't fly
I'm screwed. What the hell am I gonna do? I
Knew we're not away that I could never tell anybody about that
You know who in the hell would ever fly with me again and rightfully so I wouldn't blame him
That's a this guy for some unknown reason could have a debilitating phobia. I mean, that's a grounding thing
And it so happened and it was in Las Vegas
It was in the Hilton Hotel
And it was sitting at the bar that some real strange things happened fortuitous
What happened at the bars in Vegas? Well, it was in a bar, but that wasn't the point
I remember for some reason I I set down next to some guy and
We struck up a conversation and I found out that he ran he runs a clinic
for fear of flight
you know people have that
Passengers and people come in and they go through a program about time to overcome fear of flight. I said what?
Boy I
Needed to know about this
And so as it turned out he was very forthcoming and I would ask questions, you know all the details of
The program and how you do that what is I?
Mean how do you cure people of this thing for crying out loud and he was very forthcoming and boy
Oh dick he was taking detailed memory notes of everything that happened then I realized
Dick you can never tell anybody about that. In fact, I don't think anybody ever knew until they read my book and
Right and I did it it was a self. It was a self-help a self cure thing and it was really incredible and at the end of myself
My self-taught clinic. I have no fear of flights. No fear of heights any place
I thought wait a minute
You're supposed to have a little bit of fear because if you fall you could get hurt really bad
What was the crux of getting through that well?
Cuz just so for context for everybody that doesn't know the whole story
I mean when you're working on the Voyager flight when you had this so you've been you've been scared of
Heights your whole life, but you'd also been a pilot your whole life at this point
You'd flown in Vietnam you'd parachute you done a bunch of things that had to do with heights
But then for some reason
In the middle of this effort to go and fly around the world in the Voyager aircraft
You're getting another little aircraft, which by the way, I look at your your brother's little aircrafts that he built
They're like little one-seaters. They look like you could feel like a little model airplane that I used to build right
So maybe that's what you were scared of but you get up on this flight and all of a sudden you get this well height panic
Yeah, see
When this thing the panic happened
I've already been through my civilian thing and I was a flight instructor and I went in the Air Force and went to pilot training with the combat
Set nuclear alert all those things have already been done before I finally did my 20 years in one microsecond by the way
And we could talk about what was going on then
So anyway, I got out at
20 years in a microsecond and then I joined my brother and then we did the round the world thing. So I had I had flown a lot and
None of that phobia or scariness or anything ever manifests itself in flight, you know, I could you know
Here on fighter pilot for crying out loud
we do air shows and
I just felt right at home and there was never any situation until that one particular thing under a lot of stress that
It finally crawled out of my psyche and hit me really bad and I had to cure myself of it
So what did you do to cure yourself though?
well
First of all, you have to get all the symptoms going. I mean real quick and so I was in
You know, there's some of these hotels that have a matrium and an atrium inside and you come out of your room
And you're looking inside the hotel and there, you know, you look over the edge and it's really a long ways down there
And you go up to the edge and you get all the symptoms going all of them
And it took all the willpower I could almost drag myself grab the edge and pull myself up and look at it
And the more that I'd look down the more
The more this phobia would just explode into my psychic heart rate breath
skin cold and clammy and uncontrolled shaking and
The first thing you do with this you get all the symptoms going and then you identify
One part of your body and you concentrate on it totally on that particular thing and I chose my right elbow
Because it was shaking and I concentrate as much as I can and I finally after maybe no kidding after 20 minutes
I could get that one elbow to stop to stop shaking
And I says well, that's really cool. I says well, I'm gonna try the elbow
So soon as I would go to work on the other elbow the first one to start again
Then you'd have to go back and do that
But that was it was a procedure that you would get one
You would slow down one arm and then you were able to to control it
Boy, you went to the other arm or the right leg or the right calf or one part of it
And so you go through this procedure you drag yourself up there and and this phobia would just explode on you
Everything was going then you go down right elbow left elbow right knee left knee
And I don't know don't until you got them all calm and if you concentrate on it you can keep them quiet
But soon as you would try to do something else boom that explode again, but what I'm getting that is
as you go through this procedure and
You can can finally
I
Start to control everything and then your skin doesn't cold and clammy anymore and you feel relaxed
But the problem was I can control my breathing. I can decide when to take a breath and not
But what do you do about this damn thing in my chest? It's going like mad really high
Really high heart rates and then if it's the thing called biofeedback
And they talk about how you go with biofeedback to be able to control your heart rate and
then pretty soon I
Could go up and if it the tins would happen I go right over left able lift us and just calm everything down and then
eventually
Eventually I had no symptoms whatsoever not even a normal fear of heights on the edge
Got it solved and then
But but then you think hey there's a saying
Back in the corner of Dick's psychic someplace this gremlin could crawl out again
That's why I could never tell anybody about that. You got to keep that one quiet especially the insurance people
Especially the insurance or the FAA and my medical because I knew that that was a grounding a big time grounding item for the FAA
So that let's get back I want to get back to
Sort of how you got into flying in the first place
I'm going to go back to the book here and again look the book is awesome so many so many details inside the book
Just go get the book. I'm going to read some highlights from it
Well, but there's plenty more highlights that we're not going to read but just to kind of talk through the story a little bit
You say this throughout my childhood
I struggled with academics a struggle that was almost debilitating regardless of how hard I might try it seemed I was doomed for failure
I was held back a year in elementary school, but nothing improved by the time I reached high school
Pop decided to have a battery of test run to help me clarify my strengths and weaknesses
It was determined. I had exceptional high mechanical aptitude, but skills in other areas suggested. I was not college material
Decades of decades later would pass before it was discovered. I suffered from undiagnosed dyslexia
What I did know was I had a gift and a passion for flying and
Aspired to make my mark doing something in that field fresh out of high school
I could hardly wait for the opportunity to fly high in the stratosphere and make those white vapor contrails
So I signed up for the United States Air Force
Aviation cadet program after taking all the tests and going through the rigorous physical and written exams. I was told I was qualified
I was not qualified to be a pilot even though I was already a civilian commercial pilot
But they had a special program for me. I could become a navigator. I
Couldn't believe it. I was fully physically qualified. I had fighter pilots eyes
But did not score the best in academics. I suspect that I had
That that had everything to do with their decision to reject my application for pilot training
I complained to my Air Force recruiting sergeant
He told me all I had to do is when I got to pre-flight at Lackland Air Force Base and San Antonio was tell them about my civilian pilot status
And they would change me right over to pilot training
That was the first that was one of the first lies told to me in my new way of life away from home
It all seemed so simple and I signed the dotted line
This is the first time I'd ever been away from my mom my family and the safety of my sheltered life
I stepped off the bus in my low-hanging Levi's and long greased up Elvis haircut. I soon discovered
I would lose my cool hair and during the next two weeks would only be allowed to mutter yes, sir or no, sir
This one shit hot civilian pilot was now off to Nav school
It nearly broke my heart along with my spirit the cadets assigned to pilot training were issued brand new shiny helmets
While I was issued three large books of celestial site reduction tables
So that's your introduction you get you get a this assignment to be a navigator you go to nav class
You end up as a backseater as a Rio or radar intercept officer
You get stationed in Oregon
From Oregon you get stationed up in Iceland
And then when you get to Iceland you you apply for pilot training again and you get accepted
And and when you get accepted for that you get assigned to a air transport squadron
Which is flying in and out of Vietnam which now the Vietnam war is kind of getting?
Kind of getting started or starting to ask away and I should say well yeah, what happened
Yeah, I had no interest in navigating big cargo airplanes and I can forth so then I went into the fighters
you know I was flying fighters, but in the backseat as a radar intercept officer and
And then I applied for pilot training for some reason if I fly in the backseat long enough according to the Air Force
I got a lot smarter
So then I was smart enough that I could go to pilot training
So when I was waiting for to go to pilot training I was assigned to C124's cargo big old
They called the big old shaky and while I was waiting to go to pilot training
I was actually flying as a navigator now and this big huge cargo airplane
This is in you know right in the middle of Vietnam war back and forth the Saigon and
as it turned out
Those hours that I spent at 8,000 feet in a C124 waiting to go to pilot training gave me some incredible
Understanding that what I was going to face later on in life to fly this Voyager around the world
And as it turned out having had that Nav experience
That may have been that may have been critical to the success of the flight around the world in the Voyager
So I don't know maybe maybe fade goes around and it comes back around again
Who can tell?
So but you do end up finally like you said you got a lot smarter as you as you flew around in the back of the
Airplanes you got a lot smarter you got accepted for pilot training and you say this in the book before I knew it pilot training
67d was ready to begin and my time as a navigator came to an end
I was off off to Laughlin Air Force Base in Del Rio, Texas right on the Rio Grande River west of San Antonio
Although I didn't appreciate it at the time my experience as a navigator over vast stretches of open ocean and training with radar
Would prove to be a vital factor in the successful completion of Voyager's flight years later because of my academic challenges
I knew how I had to work clever work hard and maintain my motivation to be successful in pilot training
I would sneak a tape recorder into class by concealing into my briefcase
I made it a point to sit front and center row so I could capture every word of each lecture with the help of these tape
Lectures I arduously wrote impeccable notes to study from and aced every test. I graduated number one in my
Pilot training class granted. I had a huge head start with more flying time log than many of the instructors
But I never told anyone I was a civilian pilot. I was a civilian instructor pilot. I let them believe I was just that good
Upon graduation I was awarded my dream
F100 Super Saber affectionately known as the Hun
Out of 360 graduates, there were only two F100s offered with that
I was off to real life and death combat in Vietnam
So you kept it a secret that you were a civilian how many hours did you have?
Well, see I wanted to go to the Air Force pilot training
I can go back to that day that I stood there and it at March Air Force Base looking up at that fighter pilot
You know, he was a god from a different place and here after all those
The interim years I was going to be able to do that now. I always made a joke
That I always thought if you want to be a real Air Force fighter pilot, you had to go to Luke Air Force Base and you had to
You had to train in the hunt. It was a difficult airplane to fly. I had some really
strange things about the airplane
But that was more of a challenge. I
Says if you want to be a real fighter pilot, you got to go through Luke Gunnery School in the F100
And so I talked about that during my pilot training days. You know, I was bragging it's I'm going to get an F100
And I says I'll bullshit routine. I says they haven't given a undergraduate pilot training right out of training to go directly to fly this
really weird airplane I
Says that's all right. I says
It's all I have to have is one
Because I'm going to graduate out of 365 pilots in five different bases. That is number one
Well, you talk about a heads up that to bite my bite my tongue a lot because I was up there
You know, I was a civilian flight instructor, but I had been wanting to go to pilot training all my life
I wanted to go to that training and
And I didn't want anybody given any shortcuts or bragging about hey, I'm already a pilot
And the old old hand me says it says that's a lollipop
That I've been wanting to lick for a long time and I want to look at I want to lick every darn bit of it
Now it came to the point when you graduate the class standings
And this is kind of more or less a metaphor
But they have all the assignments written on the on the blackboard saying and there's a curtain and they come up and they say
Okay, who's number one in the class and they open up the curtain and there's all the all the assignments
It and I looked up there and much to my shock there was two F-100s
Now I've been bragging about everybody says oh, bullshit. That's not there's no way but that opened up
They were surprised
But the most surprised person in that whole room
was me I
Had no idea that it would be there
And I walked up just like yeah, I knew it all the time. Yes. I didn't know it's squat all the time
And of course then we went to Gunnery school and from there on to Vietnam
So when you were coming through as a pilot a civilian pilot structure like how many hours of flying did you have?
well
This is a guess. I probably had a couple thousand hours
So Dave Burke how much of an advantage is that oh?
Going through pilot training when you have a couple thousand hours worth of flight
Well, it was a flight instructor thing too. See I was I sold it on the day
I sold it on the day that I was 16 my 16th birthday
My mom drove me out and I sold it in a little sesson 140 and then I
She took me down to the DMV and I did my driver sesson and then I could drive my mom home for the first time
so I was
so I was a
pilot before and then your 17th birthday the day that you needed to be to be a private pilot that I could carry passengers and so
for and then at 18 years old it could be a commercial pilot and
And flying structure
So Dave what's the assessment you have two thousand hours worth of pilot time and you're going through pilot training
That's definitely gonna help but in in Dick's offense that can that can cut both ways and when I was in flight school the kids now
Nobody nobody hit it. You know you couldn't hide it. I think when I was going through if you had flight time everybody knew it
Some of the best students had experience
but some of the worst students were the ones that had experience too, so I think you you obviously had to keep that to yourself and
You have to not reveal your bad habits or your habits that you have brought as an aviator and you got to pretend like it's all new
So having flight experience mostly helps but it's I saw kids struggle a lot because they didn't want to learn a new way of doing it
So a few guys that had a flight time I didn't get through the program particularly because they were unwilling to adapt to a new way of doing it
Sounds like you didn't have that Dave Dave. You're exactly right because it had to be very careful of that
But it wasn't the fact that I was I was going to be
Like the civilians do it better or something
But I was just I noticed that I was just amazed about how different things were it's all
proceduralized
like in military pilot training
It's to enter the pattern is exactly flights. There's a bridge you'd have to overfly and then there was a there was a
House farmers pump house on his thing and then you turn down when and it was all
proceduralized, you know brace talk trim turn
Very regimented see very regimented and it was amazing
I thought you know somebody that farmer goes out there and tears down that pump house none of these guys could get back
That it's just a procedure and but that's that's the way it was
But the thing was that I sit there and remembered as a as a little kid
Sitting there in Dineuba picking grapes or something and looking up and see those contrails a single contrail
So high that I could not see what was making them and I looked up at that thing and never forget I says damn
That's got it. There's nothing else. I got to do it. I mean the desire to be at the pointy end of that contrail
Was overwhelming here again the mode the motivation and
There it was two sabers up for grabs and you got one of them. I got one
I'm gonna fast forward a little bit in the book here
You say my assignment to Vietnam as a combat fighter pilot was typical after completing advanced
Gunnery school at Luke Air Force Base in Phoenix, Arizona the this newly minted jet fighter pilot attended Air Force survival school at
Fairchild Air Force both base and Spokane, Washington. It was February dead of winter
I would be stationed in the jungle tropics, but was being trained to survive in waist-deep snow on
Our ride to Vietnam. We made a short stop at Clark Air Force base in hot and sticky Philippines where we received specific jungle
Survival training this environment was definitely more representative of what we would have to face in the jungles of Vietnam instead of having to build a shelter in the snow
We learned how to catch kill and eat boa constructors a
Riving in Vietnam
I had to burn bum a ride from Saigon and a C-130 flying 300 miles north to Fou Cat
Where the 35th tactical fighter wing was located in August of 1967?
I was assigned the 416th squadron as a newbie fighter pilot to get checked out in combat in
South Vietnam most of the action was aired a ground in support of the troops
Look in support of the ground troops being a newbie. I was always the tail end Charlie at the end of the four ship formation
We would check in with the forward air controller a guy in a little Cessna and he would fire a smoke rocket into the jungle
We would hit his smoke with our four five hundred pound mark 82 bombs and then return to base
I seldom saw any ground fire coming my way
So that's kind of your introduction you get over there you're doing these missions
And
Then this happens you say finally the day I had been anticipating my entire life arrived
How would I react to being shot at directly my target this day was a bunker complex and the goal is to drop napalm into the tunnels
I flew at low altitude
Assumed a shallow dive angle and snuggled up close to the enemy tunnels to hit the target as I rolled in just off to the
To the right of my bunker target a 50 caliber triple a opened up firing bright tracers the tracer stream was aimed directly
At me and they were close someone down there was trying to kill me specifically
This is the moment that would define me as a warrior or as a coward
In 1803 President Jefferson sent Cla Lewis and Clark on the three-year core of discovery to open up the west upon their return
Captain Meriwether Lewis told the president the greatest acceleration a man exhilaration a man can feel is
being shot at and missed as
That long stream of trappers tracers zipped past my canopy
My first thought was not to turn away or hide between my knees or to cry for my mother
It was exactly the opposite my first reaction was the audacity of that son of a bitch to shoot at me
Generally the next thing you do will get you killed
Resetting the site from the bombs to guns. I rolled hard right and headed in to destroy that bastard
Observing this my flight lead screamed routine get the hell out of it there. I argued but sir. He shot at me
He repeated routine get the hell out of there and probably saved my foolish amateur ass
Captain Lewis was right the exhilaration was overwhelming and extremely addictive at last
I had found my answer to how those World War two bomber crews could go out again and again. I
Too could do it. I was a combat warrior. I loved it. I welcomed it. I needed more much more as
My combat career progressed. I was described by some as aggressive among the aggressive I
Had not come to Vietnam to drop bombs on the top of trees as with most hot shot fighter pilots
I came to
Kick some ass win and then go home
That's pretty good introduction to combat it sure was
But then it answered a lot of questions
But it also found it generated something else
I don't know if I talked about that about I call the
There's an adrenaline gland most people have
And I call it a combat gland and I think it's right here on the right side of my neck someplace
Now what happens that it's only active if somebody shoots at you
And then he gets active and what it pumps into your psychic into your system is the most
Well, it's extremely addictive
and
Euphoric
Addictive and euphoric and it's like an addiction a drug addiction. Well, maybe it is a metaphor again
But you need to have more and more and then I found out about misty
by kind of by accident
That that was part of the I think that's the only mistake I made in the book
It's the 35th Tech Fighter Wayne. It's actually a 37 but whatever
Anyway, there was this little little detachment of the very small
Very small group of people in a very highly classified area and doing some really shut-off stuff
And I thought that's what I came here for
Yeah, you you write about
Here the about the about the misty's them the misty the misty's flew the two-seat jet trainer version of the F100
Each plane carry two fighter pilots one in the front was the mission commander and the one in the back was the forward air controller
To keep each honest those rule roles alternated
They flew low and fast over the panhandle of North Vietnam Vietnam and Laos
Single fighters armed with only a few hundred rounds for the 20 millimeter can cannons and 14 white smoke marking rockets
To be able to see them through the camouflage. They had to get right down in amongst them
So the loss rate was high the first misty commander major bud day who we heard from already today
We shot down early in the operation and spent more than six years as a POW
With air refueling support from the KC 135 tankers over the Gulf of Tonkin misty missions were long four to six hours and laced with plenty of action
Owing to high risks the misty unit was composed of only volunteers and each tour of duty was short only a hundred and twenty days a
High percentage of those who did more than one tour were shot down
Each misty sortie was assigned flights of F105 Thunder chiefs or F4 Phantom fighter bombers if they had a really hot target
They could scramble gun fighters off the alert pad at the Nang to come north and work with them
Most high-value targets in the north were well defended with intense triple a
Once a target was determined the misty's orbited just out of gun range and waited for the fighter bombers to join it took a
Few minutes in the orbit to brief everyone on the target and that gave the gunners plenty of time to pump up adrenaline and exercise
Their trigger fingers the misty had to mark the target with a white smoke rocket and was the first one
Down the shoot the gunners knew the drill as well as the misty's rolled in
Inverted and pulled the nose down toward the target every gun would open up within seconds as tracers flashed by their canopies
They lined up to fire the smoke marking rocket
It was always one hell of a rush a real e-ticket ride
Now this was more like it. This was real combat. This was what I came to Vietnam to do. I had to become a misty
How did I do it? First of all misty's are volunteer. Okay volunteers, okay?
Okay, so I volunteer
So in January of 1968 my life changed dramatically
I was a misty and on my way to the action in North Vietnam
No more making toothpicks out of jungle trees or upsetting monkey colonies
My new world revolved around heavy triple a flak truck parks burning oil fuel dumps
Storage bunkers and stopping the flow of war material along the Ho Chi Minh trail
This was what I was here for
God I loved it
Yes, so they so you only had a hundred and twelve the standard tours 120 days
120 days in misty right and
The the you're going out on these operations. What's the chances you're going out on a misty operation?
What's the chances you're gonna receive enemy fire every time hundred percent hundred percent?
the
Misty day well, we could only do three
Misty missions in a row three of and then you were totally spent
Beat when you say in a row you mean three days in a row three days in a row three and these are four to six hours a piece
Four to six hours. However, you'd wake up
You'd wake up three or four hours ahead of time because you had a long intelligence briefing. What what was going on up there?
What were the other misty's?
reporting truck parks
Butch barge traffic burning trucks whatever we need to be ready up to speed before you went up there and took over
So there was a long there was a long a long intelligence briefing
And then you go out to the airplane. It's still dark
And you get in the F100 you taxi out and using a Vietnam. It's
It's kind of semi foggy maybe a little drizzle kind of an eerie thing
And just before dawn at Fouquette every morning alone F100 with light is after burner
And off into the Merc to North Vietnam and
Every morning I'd hear that that loan F100 take off and wonder
You know what his day was going to be like
And
You go up we had our own tanker
Because if you're low and fast in a jet you're burning fuel and
Since you have your own tanker off the coast, it's just you then you could do multiple refueling and you could still fly your mission
But it was kind of a kind of an eerie solid thing I
Remember going through the chow hall and the Vietnam combat chow hall
well, you've experienced that too powered a powered eggs and
greasy bacon and some some some stuff in the morning chow home
And maybe you would drink in a little bit before the night before and you're running out feeling all that good
and normally
You wouldn't want to you wouldn't want to eat it. I've look at that and I said it skip it, you know
But I stand there and I look at that food
And I think about how terrible it is and then somebody a little voice would come to you and said dick
You better eat this because this may be the last meal you're going to have for a long time
And then with that in mind you sit down there and you whiff it down and gag it down as much as you can
But then it was about a 20 minute flight you go up and you reach on bridge on with your tanker just off the coast of North
Vietnam and
About 20,000 feet you take on your load of fuel and then
this
This experience between the time that combat started that you back off of your tanker and you make that turn and
You start descending out at 20,000 feet now
You're going to penetrate north Vietnamese airspace and you're going to try to do it at a different place each time
Not for the routine
But it was very solemn the air was generally very smooth the most serene thing you could ever see and pretty soon
The coast of Vietnam which is normally kind of farmland and rice paddies and things
Most peaceful thing you've ever said
And as you descended out at 20,000 feet hit the coast at low altitude where our mission was
You check your visor hit your visor down your chin strap on make
doubly sure that all the seat ejection safety pins are pulled out and in your pocket and
Then all of your emitters tied off because you don't want to have a transponder on or a beacon on
And then you set up for the rockets and the mill setting and then you arm the gums
And then you sit there for a handful of minutes
and you think
God I want to know what the next six hours of my life is going to be like
And it's kind of an awesome quiet
Solidude feeling and then you got it pumped up to 550 knots and
then all of a sudden now this is kind of the
Light level was really low because it's just go early in the morning
It's just done. We just want to we don't want to penetrate it Don
Now we're going to be there till noon
But that first time you have this eerie feeling like you know what does the next?
Six hours of my life is going to be like and then all of a sudden all that changes
because the very first gunner on the shoreline sees you and
Every bloody tracer that he fires you can see it really easy
And then there's a lot of guns on the coastline and they know the drill and missies coming
Because we're up here every day and then the whole skies is full of the most beautiful
air
Show you've ever seen this massive
Massive display of
of
Tracers and then you try to find maybe of
They call it I've heard it called the terror and the curtain to make your way to make your way in bond
But then with the very first time
That that first guy opens up at you with the tracers that little gland in my shoulder. I was telling you about ha
It's on it is pumping and then it's frickin combat, baby
And we're going to be there in mortal combat with my fellow men for the next six hours
And I'll tell you what this guy loved every damn second of it
It was a big challenge
You know you kind of hide your trucks and stuff and your war materials to kill our soldiers in the south and we're going to
Frickin find it and I'm going to round up some F4s and some F105s that come down there and bomb it and take you out
And if any of you guys even have the thought of one of your classic
Russian gun sights six position in a circle. They're all classic Soviet with 37 and 57 millimeter
And then there's the other one the 50 cal and the ones at 14
Zip guns and and then there's always the everybody has an AK-47
I mean you fly by especially in the mornings that all the little villages they all look like sparklers and they're all shooting
But they're shooting
You know, we're pulling a lot of G jinking really hard so they can't ever they can't ever aim at us
And every once in a while we'd pick up a small arms round
Very rarely, but then it's the big stuff that would down blow your whole airplane apart
And then it was fights on so are you waiting for the for the fighter bombers to show up before you ingress?
You see there's an air order a battle for the day a frag a call out and
We were assigned
like the
Like the other misdeeds several some other targets that were identified that we need to go up and make strikes on
on that area and then
Just before the day started they were assigned
Your assignment 105s a flight of what if one of fives?
Or a
F4s called the gun fighters with the F4s out of the name
They were assigned to us they'd show up and we run to Vue and I already have the target and I go down and find it
identify it and
Then we'd we'd brief them
You know the altitude the escape routes what the winds were altimeter setting you and that's a brief that you're doing on station
Yeah, when we finally join up with them
Would so would you have to in order to find the target would you have to go down?
Right and look right and that was the big problem
That was mainly why we had a forward air control in North Vietnam because the guys the guys that would come up there
They're not up there all the time and they're high altitude and a lot of times
I find that this is really unfortunate that they would go and drop bombs on villages and stuff
Especially at night. They'd see a little village and they'd bomb the villages and
They'd say and the morning misty they come up and the controllers would say hey
They had a I said the guys were up here last night and we killed 40 trucks on Brown route and
We go over there and there wouldn't be any trucks on Brown route
But there was a village over your burning when we put an end to all that
so that I think that we directed the
airstrikes against
legitimate military targets on the Ho Chi men's trail and that was good and
Sometimes they identified it and they wouldn't have fighters
So they would identify it and then they would brief us the next morning and we'd go up there and find it
Now if you're up there almost every day for six hours you get to know that place like the back of your hand
And especially the gun sights
The gun sights accuracy it varied dramatically
In fact, there was a guy and and Laos he was on an edge of a real rugged car
So he's the 50 caliber we call him the kid on the cars
and every morning we come up and wake him up and
As we'd orbit him he would shoot exactly a hundred and eighty degrees
And he was the worst shot in the world and that always looked at now
How do you get all that ammo up there on this steep cliff and why in the world?
Why in the world when he would he lead us like a hundred and eighty degrees around the circle and
But I'd have a new misty pilot
I said hey, I want to show you what a about a 50 caliber looks like and so we'd fly up there and the kid on the cars
He would fire and they wouldn't you come any close and so forth, but every once in a while some of these gun crews are really good
They would get us
Normally you could see most of the gun sights and if you could see them then you could avoid them or you could not maneuver in such a way
And we'd name we give them names and stuff
That basically if the guy was really good and his camouflage, you know, this is a major Soviet style gun sight
If they were well camouflaged and
We came by and I had my belly up looking at something else and they would fire
And the tracer would come those big 57 caliber of 37 caliber
Things you know as big as a beer can would come by with that with that red tracer
Come by really close and sometimes you can actually hear the shockwaves, you know, like they like a baseball bat
Around your plane then they know that they were really close
And if they were really close and very clever and well camouflaged we freaking had to go back and kill them at least I did
and
One thing the thing about combat if somebody is trying to kill you
And like the bombers and World War two they just have to sit up there and take it they couldn't retaliate against it
But I thought that was really horrible
But the misty had the ability that if you were good and you came really close to me fucker
We're gonna come back and take you out
And so I'd roll back roll back and there'd be a ring around the gun side to be slowly drifting away
And then I'd pull up just out of their range and I think and they knew what the drill was going to be after that
because I need to go out and get some tankers, but I'd come back and
We scrambled the gun fighters out of Da Nang or we have a flight of F105
So we could rob from the guys going downtown Hanoi or something. I says hey I
Got a target for it. It's an extremely aggressive
Aggressive accurate gun sight and I want to take them out. I want you to take them out for me. Oh
Sometimes the misty would try to try to describe where the gun sight was
By talking them into it so I didn't have to mark them
I said, okay guys you see the Gulf of Tonkin out there. Yeah, we see that
It's a big river called the Crankheave River. Okay, follow it up until it has a dog leg beam. You see that
This is okay right at that place and you try to talk on a little road and right off there. There's a field
and if if I tell them
Sometimes I could talk them into like a truck storage area or something and they could get that
But if I'm trying to to talk them into it verbally into a gun sight
They almost never can see it
They say okay, missy. This is your target you freaking mark them man
Now what you have to go to what altitude to get a mark on a on a gun sight
Well, we knew what the range of them of them was and we just climb out of the range of
30 57 was a little higher 37 was a little lower
and it was really interesting because these
these
The shells that would be six position and they'd all open up in the long stream of tracers and they'd float up and they get slower
And slower and slower and finally the tracer would go out and then you couldn't see them anymore
But then they would start down I guess and then they would all self-destruct boom boom boom boom boom
Little puffs of smoke and we try to stay above that and that's what 4,500 feet
Oh, yeah
Four to five thousand feet of memory serves me right and so you're doing your best to fly above that range right?
When you go to mark a target do you have to go into that range or can you mark it from outside?
You got to get in there now they know what the drill is
And it's up to you to put that white phosphorus smoking
Right marking rocket right on top of it and what you want to do is find out what the drift is
So you put the marking rocket just upwind and when the white phosphorus goes off
It it blooms up and hopefully it'll drift over
Drift over the gun so when my first fighter down the chute
He has a better chance because they can't see him now and then he could come in and drop his bombs
But it was
You know as a kid
For the first time you climb up on a high dive hit a swimming pool
And you walk out and all of a sudden this 15 foot looks like 15 miles into the cup
What the hell am I doing here?
And it takes all the courage you have to walk out on the edge of the board and jump off for the first time
And everybody's experienced something like that
It comes up
Finally the miscities circle on them and they shot and they missed the miscities now they know what the drill is and
And they know that if the first thing they do if missy marks them they're dead
And so all their concentration is is to knock the missy out of the sky
And they're all waiting for you and sometimes you'd have to wait because the fighters weren't available then and then
They'd have to go out and refuel or whatever
so you're circling them and
And they know what the drill is and soon as miscies since his wings roll up past vertical
And soon as your past vertical and a nose starts down
Every damn gunner knows that that they got to kill the kid they got to kill the misty because if they get marked or fucked
Now there's a handful of seconds because
There's a thing called lead if you're flying along we could always jank and they would have a hard time tracking us and give us the right lead to hit us
But there's about four or five seconds where there's no lead requirement
Because all I have to do is aim right at the missy because he's coming down the chute right at you
There's no lead. There's no lead requirements or anything and there's that handful of seconds
That's when you got your nose at the target
And you got to keep it there for four or five seconds to get your rocket off. Yeah, and it
There's an overwhelming urge to just throw the rocket down there and get away that then you keep thinking
This is important because how I market how accurately if I can use the smoke to blind them
I owe that to the fighters that are coming up there, too
And so it takes a lot of willpower and the nose finally comes down and then they're all shooting
then it's all coming up your way and
And to roll out pull it down
Put the pepper just below the target and then let it ease up and make sure there's no yaw involved in the airplane
And you're not a lot of G because if you're having if you're flying in G the angle of attack will change your marking and it's all that
But it's that handful of seconds and it takes you do you think
It just don't throw this thing out there. It's just like an eternity
And you pull it up and then you stabilize it and then pickle and one's
Smoke rocket comes out now the bad thing is the escape route and once you fired fairly low
That it may be a 30 or 40 degree dive angle and what altitude you're at when you when you fire
1500 feet
Okay, so maybe two thousand fifteen hundred two well within range
Okay, now the worst thing you want to do is you fire the fire though then you pull off straight ahead over the target
You don't want to do that. So once you fire you roll the airplane about 130 degrees to the right and then you pull down into the ground
And you pull down into the ground and you pull down into the ground and you pull down into the ground and you pull down into the ground
And then you pull down into the ground and and what you want to get is a tracking solution that they have to do some type of skill to be able to hit you
Tracking now they've already had this one chance where they don't have to do any the only going to do is aim they don't have to lead you
So you pull to the right and down and roll wings level now you're coming out pretty low
But there's no way they can track you because now there's a big angular velocity and stuff and you're pulling up and when you come back around
You want to look at your smoke and it's either hit my smoke or generally the fighters three or four fighters that are orbiting
There is absolutely no fricking idea no confusion because the whole thing the muzzle flashes just almost light up the world
And then then it's payback time and the misty pulls back up and you say you know hit my smoke and then you pull up around and then lead rolls in
And now they all concentrate on lead coming because he's got to do the same thing coming down the chute of course he can drop his bombs a lot higher
I was going to say can't he drop from maybe six or eight thousand or something like that
So is he out of their range of their weapons?
No by the time they pull out they're probably down within their their lethal range for sure
And now if you're flying around and you see the guy roll in there's no there's no way you can tell because of the angular velocities and stuff
The angles off when he rolls in and drops his bombs now and his stick of bombs come off and he pulls off and then you see in the bombs fall
And then you see these the gun side the muzzle flashes going up at him and they see them and you see them down there shooting like mad
And then you watch the bombs come and they'd see the gun sides the bombs come and then the gratification you get when it hits a dead center
And all of a sudden the most congregation of dirt and nails the gun size and then there's the guns are laying over and all the bunkers are gone and stuff
Sometimes sometimes they miss so what we would do when they would roll in then I would then I would pull up in the opposite direction and make a fake pass at him
And that was to draw fire away from number two and he's coming down the chute and then we just do a crossing maneuver and you may be able to do the same thing for three coming down
To try to try to draw some other fire and there's a handful of minutes that it's pretty exciting
And in a four to six hour mission how many targets would you go after?
It varied a lot depending on the weather sometimes. It's usually a pretty high workload.
If you're not if you're you've had yours assigned targets sometimes all you want to do is drop bombs on a road to do a road cut on the side of a cliff
And try to close the try to close the roads they did a lot of that thinking they were going to close down the Ho Chi Minh trail
We go down there and after news we put in a bunch of strikes and actually have a road slide on a cliff
And I thought boy that shut down the Ho Chi Minh trail for a while we come back at dawn the next morning and the road is fixed
It didn't slow them down at all. The other thing that was really fun is that is that the Navy went out and they mined at some of the rivers
Like the Coyn Key River up there and they were magnetic mines and when a boat comes by it would trigger the magnetism and it would blow up
Well these mines would sit up there and they get more and more and more sensitive and this was just fun I guess
So the first guy down the river first guy in that morning we come real low right down the river going real fast and almost invariably we could trigger off some of those mines behind us
Just to go up and screw them sometimes
Good overview of what you guys were doing up here. Again you profile some of these missions in here. Here's one of them where there's a down pilot
You say down in the jungle is one of our own a fellow fighter pilot a warrior. He was still free and talking on his survival radio
So this guy got shot down and you hear him talking. Our creed was that if you are free and talking we will never give up on your rescue
Force that morning suffered numerous delays and mismanagement before helicopters could be deployed into North Vietnam permission had to be required from some kid in LBJ's White House
It seemed the permission giver was asleep and no one wanted to wake him which caused extensive delays at a time when every second was critical
Frustrations abounded on these on the for those on the rescue team I had flown seven and a half hours the day before and would invest another seven and a half hours before this day was over
With nerves ready to snap this disjointed rescue effort continued and it was already close to noon
My relief Wells Jackson misty to one had just arrived as he was being briefed a call came from search and rescue headquarters in Saigon
Canceling our rescue and instructing us to pull out all forces
I was incensed with this turn of events but the orders had originated from those much higher on the chain of command than I a lowly captain
Then it hit me since I was the only one who could talk directly to Jack the down pilot it was going to be my job to tell him we were giving up and abandoning him to the North Vietnamese for certain torture, imprisonment and possible death
I was infuriated what were they thinking we were American fighting men and we never give up
Enraged I demanded to know who gave the order to pull out turns out it was a general in Saigon who thought it was too risky and it issued the order to withdraw
I thought since that general made the decision to quit that general should be the one to tell scotch 03 that he was to be abandoned
Sleep deprived and furious I ignored any sense of military rank protocol and demanded the general tell me the exact words to use when informing Jack that further rescue attempts were being aborted
While we waited for the exact words I finished briefing my relief misty to one and with a heavy heart left the area knowing we were about to fail one of our own
Back at home base and foo cat it was now close to sunset I sat slouched in the O Club disillusioned that my commanders would could violate our most sacred Cree if you are free and talking we never give up
Alone and heartbroken my only company a couple of empty beer bottles I contemplated my commitment to these high risk missions
It was then that Wells Jackson misty to one burst through the door with a big smile on his face I had to wonder what the hell he was so happy about
Hey routine they got scotch out I could not believe my ears and blurted what Jackson continued yep scotch was rescued seems the general could not come up with the exact words to tell a fellow warrior he was about to be abandoned
Perhaps the general began to realize how such a decision could compromise the long term morale of all of us who fought and died on the Ho Chi Minh trail
That particular mission when they got him out see before that that morning well actually the day before we're up there and there was a flight of F105 not under our control but I could hear him talking that scotch 03 the number three guy in that four ship of F105
They were calling calling and there was no answer so I flew over to the area that they were working and just by a fluke by glint maybe just a second I spotted the orange and white canopy in the top of the jungle
And as I flew up pulled up to come back around it disappeared and but however I memorized the memorize that spot before I took my eyes off of it again so I pulled up and I called and called there was no answer
And so then I pulled up and I did a dive bomb pass where I could talk to him overhead diving right straight at him at that point and I called scotch and he came back and he could hear me and he could talk
Now there's just a handful of seconds that we could exchange exchange information where are you I mean are you okay I have a call they said I have a broken back and I can't move come and get me
Now the sun was just going down and it wasn't enough time to generate a rescue force and so Steve Amdor another fellow Missy and we'd already done a six and a half hour mission and we put scotch asleep that night and told him we'll be back at dawn to get you
And we went back to Denay and landed and tried to organize a rescue force that morning and then we took off about three hours of sleep we took off and just right at dawn the next morning I came across that thing with my afterburner going
And called him and there was no answer so I pulled up back around and I dove at that spot and then I could ask a question he can give me the answer and then we pull off and we'd go away
So that's how we were going to communicate with him
Okay this was this was dawn this faithful day it was long and disjointed rescue in fact they'd shot up two helicopters the helicopter would come in and hover and they found him that night they located him and they set up a flag trap because they knew we were coming back
And every time one of the helicopters would come into a hover Jolly Green and HH3 Air Force helicopter they would shoot and shoot him up pretty bad and they did that to two of them and they got away
There was an A1 Sky Raider that was also working the rescue that morning and he got shot down and for some reason he tried to dead stick it into the Ben High River and he was killed
So we lost two helicopters and we had one A1 shot down and the pilot was killed
The whole morning was disjointed because they had B-52 strikes coming in and they pulled off our rescue forces numerous times and let these big bombers
You know here these guys are 30,000 feet they dropped their bombs before they even go feet dry and to try to hit some targets that were near where we were working so we got pulled off back and forth
So finally the Jolly Greens were trying to come across the border in North Vietnam and they couldn't get approval
And I said something that was probably not very, I said something that wasn't very complimentary about these guys that wouldn't come in and get my guy
Which turned out then I learned about the fact they couldn't because of some snot in those kid in LBJ's White House that had to approve it and nobody wanted to wake him up
And boy then the frustration level was just really high. You know there's targets that we'd have but when you're out there and you're trying to find and rescue one of your own
Then that's totally different, your motivation different. I kept thinking God it could be me down there
And so there was a guy named Don Ingan in an HH3
Now this is after the time that I briefed him and then I says tell me the exact words
If he made a decision to leave this guy to die well then damn it let him tell me the words
You made the decision, you come up with the words to tell him then I down on me hey I'm the only guy that can talk to him
I'm going to have to tell him that I thought screw him I'm not going to come up with my words let the generals words
And then I left with a heavy heart like we said and as it turned out Wells came up and they, the general didn't change his mind
And only this time when Ingan came in and hovered they put the guy's name was the PJ had been in country three days I think
He was a two striper PJ that he was going to be down on the ground and he was there this long enough to hear all the horror stories about being on the ground in North Vietnam
And then he came into a hover and he dropped the PJ down through the jungle to try to find Scott 03
And I guess he roamed around and it's all in tape it's incredible tape
And Wells Jackson is talking about a gun sight over there that's trying to lob 37 millimeter into the rescue area
And in Wells backseat he has a photographer that went along with him that day and the guy was six hours and he was throwing up continuously
And over the interphone they could hear the kid throwing up but he came into a hover anyway Cali Sergeant Herman Cali
That's the PJ
It's on the ground and he finally found he roamed around and found him
And then now he had the vector of the Jolly Green ore and now it's all very quiet there's no ground fire or anything
And he says forward forward forward it's okay it's good drop the thoughts of penetrator it's a long cable with a special peep
You know what it is a penetrator device kind of like a bullet that can go down through the jungle
And it goes down and Sergeant Talie or Herman Talie puts Scott 03 on the penetrator
And then everything's flat you know the guy sitting there in the nice hover Ingan
Ingan is a Coast Guard exchange pilot it's not an Air Force pilot Coast Guard pilot
And they said okay and then Talie on the ground has a little radio and he says okay I got him you know pull me up
And then there's a handful of seconds and you can just imagine he's sitting there in the hover and the cable's coming up also slowly
And I don't know how high it was it may have been 30, 40 maybe 50 feet in the sky
And then they activated the trap
Now they knew this time that the Jolly wasn't going any place he was hooked
You know the other guys weren't hooked they just get away
But they knew that the Jolly they had the choice of either cutting the cable and leaving
And Ingan said later it says guy how could you sit there under that withering fire
And he says there was no way I would ever leave one my PJ on the ground
God I mean that was just his mindset an incredible person
And this cable come up and Talie would squeeze the mic button on his little radio and he's been screaming
Ground fire ground fire take it out take it out ground thin in the background you can hear intense automatic weapons fire
And Talie told it later he looked up at the Jolly and it was being from all different directions being shot to crap
I mean the windshield was being blown out there was hydraulic fluid leaking the one of the landing gear that just plopped out
And there was punchers of fuel pouring down and pieces falling down off the airplane
And later on I asked Talie I says this is what a great thing you know to save the helicopter you know you'd sacrifice yourself to do that
And he looked at me you know typical boy this kid he looked at me says oh no no sir it wasn't that at all
He says I looked up and I didn't want the damn thing falling on me
Anyway Angon he was awarded the Air Force Cross but it should have been a Medal of Honor
And even today I'm still trying to work that out especially since I found out that an entire Vietnam War
That all the contributions that the Marines I'm sorry not the Marines but the Coast Guard this guy was a Coast Guard exchange pilot
That whole war and all the participation by the Coast Guard in that war there was not one Medal of Honor winner
And I thought that's really a shame and even today I'm signed to the right letters and trying to get that thing upgraded
Because I think it would be important that the contribution of the Coast Guard should be recognized by one of their heroes and Angon to do that
Anyway they got him above the jungle canopy and then he translated away and it was just a few miles and he just crossed the Ben Hai River
There was a medevac there called the Rockpile and they landed and I don't think the Jolly ever flew again it was shot up so bad
Man we got another situation in the book and in this one you're flying and there's another plane another Saber that's on fire
And there's a general you don't know this at the time but there's actually a general in the front seat
Yeah this is another RF4C you know same thing that Lee was flying except that was a reconnaissance for it
It was a recce version of the Phantom
And so this guy their call sign is strobe 1-0 and so you're flying next to him you see that they're on fire
And you tell them hey you're on fire and going to the book here it says strobe 1-0 acknowledged our call that he was on fire and stated we're bailing out
This should have been a standard ejection they were flying at 10,000 feet straight level at an ideal speed of about 230 knots everything was set for routine ejection and water rescue
Which is interesting that you're talking about a routine ejection and water rescue that shows your mentality
I had never seen an ejection up close the notoriously complicated F4 Martin Baker seat known as the back breaker would be something to witness
I eased the old hun to route formation about 30 feet out on his left wing and waited for what seemed an eternity nothing happened
Almost two minutes dragged by before the rear seat finally ejected later on I asked the back seat of what had taken so long they knew they were on fire
He said that they had taken out the checklist and reviewed the ejection procedures
The general did not want to eject they argued about the position of the command ejection handle in the rear cockpit
The major upholding his duties wanted it in the command eject position where the guy in the back ejects the front seat pilot
However the general insisted that it be left in the off position thereby making each seat a single initiated ejection
The major reluctantly sat up straight grabbed the yellow handle between his legs and pulled leaving the general to his fate
From my vantage point the rear cockpit ejection was textbook and I remember it vividly
The aft canopy opened and separated cleanly clearing the tail by at least 20 feet
The rear seat started up the rails as the bottom of the seat cleared the cockpit the rocket motor ignited burn for 1.2 seconds
And the seat went straight up very stable when the rocket stopped the small drogue parachute released and the seat rotated backward 90 degrees as it cleared the tail
Looking over my right shoulder I could see the main C9 parachute canopy had also deployed as it started to open the seat separated from the back seat pilot and kept right on going
With the canopy fully open the pilot swung back underneath I thought the whole thing was neat as hell until I looked back at the stricken aircraft
What I was about to witness was chilling it would leave an indelible imprint which remains surreal and unforgettable to this day
I was horrified to see the front cockpit totally engulfed in fire
I saw an occasional flash from a white helmet that was barely visible through the smoke and flames
The general was sitting straight up as before but motionless he seemed oblivious to his circumstances
Huge flames that resembled giant blow torches streamed from the rubber petal, rudder petal area at his feet through the cockpit around him
And out through the now open rear cockpit the fire had filled the phantom's interior and produced a dense black smoke trail that obscured the tail
Strangely the aircraft flew on, terrified I thought the general must not be aware of the fire so I began to holler over the radio
Strobe 1-0 bail out bail out
I continued to scream desperately but the general just sat there doing nothing
The wings remained level and the aircraft now began a shallow descent
My god I screamed why doesn't he eject how can you just sit there what the hell is wrong
Then I figured it out maybe he couldn't hear me I was too far away 30 feet so I drove the hunt right up next to the burning cockpit and screamed again
Strobe 1-0 bail out bail out
Then Harland yelled oh my god look at it burn
Frustrated in half in shock I wanted it just transpired not 10 feet from us we moved in closer
So close the air pressure between the two aircraft caused the fiery phantom to roll up into a right bank
As I pulled back the F-4 turned 90 degrees rolled back wings level and pointed itself directly at the beach in a slightly steeper descent
By then we could no longer see the general's white helmet only a blackened charred canopy
The paint on the entire nose was burned and blistered there were a couple of small explosions in the nose area that blew some of the panels loose and sent other pieces flying off the plane
The entire front front end was a charcoal colored mass the orange and yellow flames subsided their dense smoke streaming backward over the fuselage
For some unfathomable reason I continued to call Strobe 1-0 begging him to get out even though it was obviously futile
We stayed close on his wing and at 500 feet the old phantom gave one last gas pitched up a little then dove straight into the beach and exploded
I just couldn't let go Harlan screamed god damn it dick pull up
I know Harlan's stern direction was the wake-up call that saved us I might very well have crashed right beside Strobe
I pulled up hard barely missing some small trees behind the beach pulling off to the left and in a choking voice I told Waterboy
Strobe 1-0 just impacted on the beach
Moments later Waterboy asked whether there was any chance of survival
My plaintive reply was negative survival, negative survival
Now there's a you have to kind of go and debrief this situation and there was a tape
There's a tape of this whole thing there was
And there's something that you talk about in here you there's something that you edited out of the tape
Was it some words between you and the general what was it?
Let me back up a second that was remember the Nixon he had an 18 minute gap
I had an 18 second gap
First of all these were these were extremely high-risk missions that these guys flew the recce missions they were 500 feet and they were straight and level
And they would come up and we would check in and they had their certain coordinates for departure and their routes and stuff
And the misdeed they would check in with us and then we would help them identify it sometimes they needed some help identifying stuff
And so I would stay up above these guys and watch them watch them with their you know their photo run straight and level just getting shot up like mad
Flying straight and level up there it's almost a kiss of death at 500 feet
Yeah you just never want to do that up there to fly straight and level I would never fly straight and level the misdeeds had four or five G's on us all the time
Jinking like mad so nobody could really predict where we were going to be that's the only thing that we could survive at all
But the one thing that I did know is that these were extremely high-risk missions in North into North Vietnam by the reconnaissance guys
And they were flown by lieutenants and captains just like me
The company great or the field grade and would never be a general officer
So I had just come off the tanker heading into North Vietnam and I heard the call that we had taken a hit just north of a case on I think
And we're coming out feet wet to get feet wet and so I says wow okay well I'm just coming out and they're coming they're coming out and we're coming back in so I joined up with them
Now my perception was that I was talking to the front seater and the front seater was a captain just like me right
I had no idea it was a dental officer I had no idea that I was talking to a C&I major the majors was take care of this general in the back seat
So my conversations my perception was that I was talking to a fellow captain that was sitting in the front cockpit and that wasn't the case
So we joined up with him and looked him over he looked pretty good and we had to get real close up underneath him we could see there was a little bit of fire going on up in the camera bay
Nothing, nothing bad they were complaining about losing I think they lost a utility hydraulic system and it was getting really hot but that was all
And I think the general was up in the north Vietnam where he bloody well shouldn't have been but it was his last mission it was his champagne flight he was going to go home
And he wanted, it told me that he could get an extra air medal if he flew into north Vietnam which he wasn't supposed to
So this general Bob Warley fighter pilot a good really a good guy he wanted to go up there and on his last mission and bring back some good information good photography and stuff
And so all of a sudden well we joined up with him he was about I don't know 10 miles feet wet head and south towards the name
And we saw the little fire and I was having a conversation with a fellow captain not knowing that it was a general
And so we told him that they were on fire or had a fire up in the nose and we pulled off like you said like you've read in the book in the route formation around his wing
And they took a lot longer than I thought to go ahead and I found out later that they were arguing about now the general was sitting I don't think the general really knew that there was anything really bad enough that they should eject
That's why the argument was and I'm sure that he says okay I'm going to get rid of this guy in the back and I'm going to fly this airplane back and save it because
You know if I lose the airplane and they find out I was screwing around in North Vietnam they're going to really frown at me
And I think that was his motivation to get rid of the guy in the back and then he could be the hero and fly the airplane back
Which wasn't the case the problem on the F-4 Phantom was you can't get rid of the canopy
It has a pneumatic plunger that has to push the leading edge up or else the normal wind speed clamps it down
You just can't unlock it because it won't go any place you have to have these plungers and I think when they got hit in the nose that plunger was damaged
And so he didn't know it at the time but the only way he could live was to get the airplane back because this injection system without the canopy gone you can't eject through it
It's one of the Martin Baker things. So that was in his mind. So when they finally decided to go ahead and eject the fire hit him and he wasn't
I'm sure he wasn't ready for that. Now my conversation the whole time was with that guy in the white helmet in that fire
That was the conversation we had. Had no idea that the guy was talking to us hanging in a parachute a couple miles behind us
So that was my mindset. But I often thought about what I was saying what I was seeing and what my reaction to that was
It says why did I say well maybe he can't hear me. You know how absurd this is. Hey hey deckhand I didn't notice this fire that the whole cockpit was on fire
I'm sure glad you told me about that. Now I'm just going to go ahead and eject. Hey appreciate you telling me that I'm fricking on firing a cockpit's full
So you're sitting there and you got to do something. I just
And so I called him you know strolling one bail out bail out screaming out of the bail out
And then I says well maybe he can't hear me. I mean how stupid is that. What do you mean. The difference between 30 feet
That he can hear me on a UHF radio that I transmit for hundreds of miles. I mean it's just absurd that you know the psychology of that and what hit you all of a sudden
And then I drove in so hard that their pressure turned him. Otherwise he would have crashed in the golf of Tonkha and this way he crashed right on the beach
And not wanting to let go and almost crashing right beside him
You know we pulled up and the water boy was the the controlling agency the one that controls us in and out of the pack and BDA and
Organizes fighter strikes and stuff that was our controller and then all of a sudden since he blew up now I'd seen a lot of airplanes crash
And it wasn't unusual to see another airplane you know a combat loss I'd seen those before
And it was always like okay well okay another one another combat loss and we're righted off and the war goes on
But as we were pulling up off to the left they wanted to know survival and I said negative survival
And then all of a sudden there was a whole bunch of interest in this crash site
They wanted security up there and they wanted to get medivacs and they're going to deploy a whole bunch of stuff and I don't know what the hell is going on
That's not strange airplane crashes combat loss the war goes on
So we went back we went back and found the the backseater hanging in the parachute
Only this time the wind was really strong and the golf of Tonkha and then it was really rough
Now we're down in South Vietnam south of the border so the sandpan that was coming out was coming out from the south
And it was a motorized sandpan and it was really rough and he was bouncing
So this is now a race between?
Well the guys hanging in the parachute and see normally you can get killed on somebody out there screwing around
They don't know what to do now everybody's trained the jolly comes in and they know what to do and how to take care of the parachute
You know all those issues you need to get to get you out of the water into a rescue craft
And then there's certain training Dave you move into all that many times soon
So all of a sudden we see this this motorized junk and we looked we look at it and it's what's a sandpan on a junk motorized
And he's booking it he's going and he can see the guy hanging in the parachute and he's going out there
So he go by and it has the south Vietnamese flag on it and I mean in that war that doesn't mean square root of Foxtrot Alpha what the flag is
And so Harlan that I talked about he was in the front seat he was my student that day and I was instructor in the back during this whole thing
And so I look at him and I says well we can't let that guy get back to the pilot
And I said okay well go ahead and go ahead and kill him
And so Harlan armed a guy and he came back as we're turning on final I'm thinking you know maybe he is a south Vietnamese
And why don't we just scare him so he did a low pass by and he just kept going
And so I says okay well he's got the message and now we'll just go ahead and shoot him
And as we turn final the second time I had second thoughts and I says well Harlan why don't we put some 20 millimeter right across his bow
Okay so Harlan did he rolled in and he put a stick of you know run a strafe across his bow
Now it was really neat he was going up I said no no no no his strafe went right in front of him and he goes whoop
Boom boom boom boom boom boom and then he beat back beat feet back to the store and then the Jolly Green finally came in and rescued him after that
Now we flew back to Phuket. No I went about another three hour mission that day and I didn't get back until noon
And so we pulled into Phuket and I noticed that there was every colonel in the whole base was Erdemitas
And I told Harlan I says hey I says I don't know what we did but it must have been a major fuck up
I couldn't remember that I did anything really bad but what were these damn colonels here for
And so we opened the canopy and the first colonel up the stairs says what are you doing here you're supposed to be in Saigon
You're supposed to be in Saigon what are you landing you're not supposed to land here is this all mad at me
And then I told Harlan over the interphone I says Harlan I don't know what it is but it's worse than what I thought
And then the guy finally found out that they realized he says oh you don't know who was in that airplane do you
I thought you know a wrecky guy fellow captain that you know I said that's really a shame that should have seen a lot of stuff
And he says oh my god you didn't know that it was General Warley in that airplane
Now everything all made sense and he says oh yeah by the way I got it all on tape
Because when he hired Mayday I started the little tape recorder that we Jerry rigged we bought it at the hardware store
And I Jerry rigged a plug that whatever I went into my headset that I could record it under little cassettes
That was just kind of my idea
So I handed it to him and the colonel took it and said you got it all on tape wow and he was holding it
And he didn't know what to do with it so he gave it back to me
And he says go get a class B uniform on there's going to be a T-39 scat back to bring you down
There's some generals that want to talk to you down in Saigon holy frick
The last thing in the world that this little up country pog pilot wanted to do was hanging around with four star generals
How many generals that you talked to at this point and you're deployed to Vietnam?
General I'm a little pove captaincy
So anyway the T-39 come up and picked us up and on our way down to Saigon
I thought you know I had to listen to this tape and so I played it
And there was something in there that was extremely inappropriate
Just language wise?
Harlan is dead and I'll take that what I said to the great
Fair enough
So I recorded it over it and it was exactly 18 seconds long just like Nixon's 18 minute tape
And it's a damn good thing too that I took that out of there because every one of those damn generals wanted his own personal private briefing
And so I had to play it over and over and over again and I'm thinking God I'm so glad that I raised that
It was a shame too
Along with that there was his he had two daughters General Worley good guy fighter pilot
And they call me some years later and they wanted to go down and they wanted to go to Vietnam where where their father had died
And nobody could tell them where it was the exact location
But I thought these two ladies they need to go to the to an exact spot out there to build a memorial and have closure right where their dad died
Now I tried to drag it out of my memory and describe exactly you know turn left here in this little town called Phuk Noi
And you go to the beach and you turn left and you go a hundred yards and that's where he crashed
Well it turned out it was a hundred yards the other direction
But it didn't matter because they went there and they sent me a picture of a memorial and they were hugging each other and it was kind of a closure
It was a nice thing for him
Now you got another thing that you write about in the book you write about your friend Howie Howard K Williams
What happened with him and what was this this mystery phone call that you got can you talk us through that
Yeah the miscies we were we were kind of a unique group we were doing some highly classified stuff and we were separated from most of the
In-country fighter pilots that flew those toothpick monkey deaf making monkeys deaf missions in South Vietnam
And sometimes we'd fly those missions and there was troops in contact and there was a lot going on
And we'd go in there roll in brought my bombs and leave and I'd think hey there's a combat down there you know I wanted to be part of it
What happened I mean who's in combat I want to know the details of that
And I just didn't want to climb you know fly back my airplane not knowing about it that's why I wanted to go to MISTI
And I found out about MISTI and I says hey I want to go there and it's a volunteer thing and that guy says no one of the requirements is you have to be a flight lead
And I says okay well I want to go to MISTI I kept bugging my commander the squadron commander
And he says no damn it routine you're a newbie pilot here and you'll be six or eight months four to six months before you can even think about checking out as a flight lead
So I kept bugging him and bugging him and bugging him and he finally just got pissed off and he says okay god damn it
I'll give you a flight lead check which I was no more qualified or experienced or anything
And so I went out and I didn't do a very good job as a flight lead
In fact I think I got hit on that and in country yeah an in country hit was very rare getting hit from in country the biggest thing they have it may be a 50 caliber
And they hit it in the gun bay and as an example I screw it up I mean here's the target right we're going to go in I've got a flight of four
And the wind is blowing so what does I do?
Little dick trying to be a flight lead he chooses you know there's three targets down there as an example
And so what I do I try I go and attack the target that's upwind so if it's upwind there's a bunch of smoke and the smoke drifts over all the other ones that they have to hit
You know a classy newbie screw up and so the commander says god damn it dick if you want to go to Missy then you can go get the hell out of here I want to see you again
And so then I enjoyed this these classified guys that had our own air conditioned little trailers out in our own little condominium
And that's the tip of the spear and if that's where the action was and that's where Dickie wanted to be boy that was so so happy and in fraud with that
That's why I stayed to do a second tour to do actually a hundred missions in Missy
So then I went up and what I saw in the north Vietnam and the areas that we were it was a different world
And there was a lot of a lot of ground fire and a lot of a lot of targets that had been hit and we went back 35 years later
I went back with five guys that I flew combat with and I wanted to go back to that area we call it the root packs and the north Vietnam is often about six different areas
You know two of them the Navy has and then there's the ones up around Hanoi and we were one of the ones down in the southern Panhandle just above the DMC is called root pack one
So that was that was our that was our primary area that we flew in all the time
And I don't know where was I going with that
Well I was trying to I was trying to get to the what happened with Howie
Oh with Howie. Okay this is now Howie was our I'm sorry getting old and gray beard
Howie was the top gun in our gun school he was really good he was a fighter pilots fighter pilot man had a cute little blonde wife couple of little kids this he was a cool guy
Anyway he had it during gunner gunnery school he had an engine failure and he ejected in gunnery school and when he got back he says well you know how did it go
You know why he ejected you know what happened everybody wants to know and he says well the only thing that happened is he says it jarred my he came back and he says his glasses were a jar
His sunglasses were a jar that's his only issue
It's when I'm up in MISTI I think it's cool as it gets huh? Yeah it's cool as it gets
So it's just Howie you got to come up to MISTI man this is where the action is now he didn't want to go
And then I was so excited about what we were doing and he's our top gun guy and I don't think he was as had the adrenaline or that little combat gland as bad as I did
And he finally acquiesced and he joined MISTI and on his first check out ride he basically got killed
Him and Brian Williams, Howard Williams and Brian Williams they were in an area called Chippon the very hot area up in Laos and sure enough they got hit on fire
And Brian says the fire was burning from the engine compartment all the way almost all the way into the back cockpit and they said
He says okay we're going to have to get out so they headed out a remote area in the jungle to eject and he says
Brian says okay I'm going to go and Howard says okay I'm right behind you that's last words he ever said
And Brian and I was up there flying another MISTI story and I heard this and went tearing over there and the Jolly Grain was real close and they picked him up
Pick up Brian that nobody heard and I was really upset and I said well where's Howard did you see a parachute and he didn't see anything
And I was kind of beefed about that but it was Howard he was my best friend and now he's down and never heard from him again but I did locate the wreck site
Dense jungle they didn't think there was any human beings anywhere near the place but he went down and he was there's a little ridge and you can see with the airplane
Clipped the jungle that was burning and went down into the canyon and you can see the wreckage and so every day I would go up there and real slow almost kill myself
Trying to go real slow and look down in there to see if I could see anything but it was just a wreck site
I didn't hear a thing so I thought can I go up there and on the ground and see my best buddy
So I made an arrangement out of the Khan Phenom in KP they have a radar site up there and they fly helicopters that they put the road watch thing
You know you guys you're you know you're vintage they go up there and the snake eaters like the classic snake eater and they put these guys in to watch the roads and stuff and report back and forth
Insert them and then they try to take them out and stuff
So I contacted them and I said hey can I get a ride in just you know on your way in drop me off at the wreck site and then when you're going to leave an hour or two when they come back and pick me up and bring me back
And then I will know what happened to Howard because if I see an ejection seat or something there then I will know whether he's dead or not
And so I had set that all up ready to go and I'm walking around bumping into myself too because I'm the summary courts officer so you have to you know I'm familiar with summary courts because if somebody gets killed somebody is designated as the guy that has to take care of his personal thing
and pay all his bills and pack all of his stuff up and write the letter to his wife and stuff
So that was my duty for that that I didn't like and I'm all set ready to go
Go over to Dan K.P. and they're going to take me out of the wreck site and get this phone call
And it says he said he was a major so I'm a major but I can't tell you my name
He says I know what you're going to do tomorrow exact words he says don't do it it's been taken care of
And he said do you understand that I says yeah he's been don't do it he's been taken care of I understand that
And then before I could ask any more questions he was gone so I didn't go
Now there was 18, 15 to 18 years later that I found out that they knew that Howard was dead
where they actually killed him and Laos they killed everybody
If you went down in Laos the policy was that they killed you every single one of them
There was no capture in North Vietnam you're a valuable asset
Now if you bail out of North Vietnam the civilians would kill you if they got to you first
But in fact I got another story about another F-105 pilot that I saw being decapitated with machetes right in front of my eyes
The thing about Howard it was 35 years later they found out what really happened that he was found on the ground and two stories
One of them went up there and they took his dog tags one guy said he was dead he had a broken leg and he was at the foot of a tree
But I know what happened Howard broke his leg and he was there and they went up and killed him and took his dog tags away from him
And then he told the farmer to bury him and that they didn't bury him deep enough
And he was exhumed by a large jungle animal and that's all they found of him 18 years later when we finally buried him in Arlington
What his remains were
What was the F-105 pilot that you saw get beheaded?
It was in the coastal plain now the coastal plain was flat right up to the edge of the ocean and it was all farmers
Rice paddies and farmlands and very sparsely populated and stuff
And we were on a misdi mission one day and I looked and coming right underneath me was this thing that was on fire
I didn't know that the 105 guy was even there and it was a big shock that guy was burning like mad
And so I pulled up and I could see he was trying to make a turn towards the water and fairly low altitude
Maybe three or four thousand feet or lower
And I wasn't talking to him or anything but I more or less joined up with him kind of high to watch him
Now I knew we realized the thing was on fire burning like mad this F-105 Thunder Chief
He was trying to turn to get to the water and it was kind of like a rooting section that's two misdies in the airplane
You know, come on hang in there you're going to make it you're almost there you're almost there
And then there was a big explosion in the airplane and it rolled upside down and the pilot ejected
And he was high enough that he got a good shoot and then the airplane the 105 went over and when he finally hit the ground
It looked like I don't know ten cans of napalm and then the biggest fireball I've ever seen
And so then now he's fairly low altitude he's hanging in a parachute
So I came around to circle him and you could kind of see you could see the shadow that the parachute had made
You could tell kind of how high it was and so I timed it so I came around based the final and I came by you know within
I don't know a dragon wing and a wingtip in the you know I mean really low twenty feet maybe right by him
Now he just as he landed in the rice paddy he took his helmet off he was taking his helmet off and he waved at me as I went by
And it was so close that I could recognize his face and then I noticed that there's a whole bunch of other gunners that were just shooting like mad
And so we pulled up higher back around and then it was the strangest thing I could see him in the rice paddy and there was a perfect circle
A black circle around him and it was all kind of collapsing on his on his point that's a black circle
It was the black pajamas everybody that this black silk pajamas everybody that would wear that they wore up there
And then he started running and this thing collapsed into a kind of a heart
And in my next pass I came around really low again and the farmers the farmers were on him and they all had machetes and they were chopping him up
And I pulled up and then you have really mixed emotions because I had the ability to kill every one of those people you know my twenty millimeter I could kill every one of those farmers
But then you don't know if the fighter pilot was alive or not probably wasn't but you know there's no way you could take any risk and then you pull up you have really a heavy heart
Holy crap you know pretty emotional thing
There was a there was also another rescue there was another shoot down that was I don't know maybe a number of weeks different
Here again it was another F-105 pilot and a wingman and he had his wingman and he got shot down
And I went tearing up there and found his parachute canopy on the top of a ridge
It was right off the quanky there was a quanky river south-forth of the quanky river and there's a little village down there
And it was a very steep slope that went up to the top of this ridge and as I came over came over I looked at it and I can see his parachute
And so we so he came around now his wingman is with me and we're talking and and I made a really a bad decision
I really screwed up and I still feel really bad about it today that I made a mistake that I shouldn't have
And that is I should have sent him to get fuel from our tanker right then
But the thing is that I could see the people in the village and they were starting up the hill
And so we took turns trying to put some strafe I wouldn't strafe in the people but I was putting strafe between the people
And in the pilot and I couldn't see his parachute anymore and he never came up on boys either
And so we were both doing that and instead of sending him out to get fuel or leaving him there to keep the while we got the rescue going
I could have went out and got fuel but all of a sudden we were really involved in keeping you know the people away from him so we could set up a rescue
I realized I should have done this to start with a major amateur screw up on my part I still feel bad about it today
Is that I didn't check and see how much fuel we had you know what's your fuel state and we're both ran out of fuel at the same time
So both of us had to leave and go out to the tanker and when we came back there was no voice anything
And the 105 pilot later on I've tried to find out who these pilots were and the guy that was on the top of the ridge I found that he had died
He never made it back as a prisoner of war but the guy that was in the rice pad he did and I don't have their names right now and it's not important
Anyway I was wrong about that and I found out later that the guy got killed and he did get chopped up by the farmers
And the guy on the top of the ridge he got captured and you know he made it through prisoner of war and I found out about it when they finally got released in 1973 I think it was
So as you're doing this and again there's incredible detailed stories in the book and about these missions that you're doing
I'm going to fast forward a little bit to well I guess it's a pretty notable mission for you
You were basically doing a test of a theory of bringing guys up that you worked directly with is that right?
One of our biggest problems is target accuracy and you know I'd hang it out and find a really great target I'd find a barge I'd find a storage area
And we have a flight of I don't know maybe it was a coincidence but my perception was that the F-4s could barely hit the ground much less my target
And it was not unusual that we'd put a flight of F-4s in on the target and my BDA was that there was no ordnance hit within 10,000 meters of my target no visible damage
It was very frustrating you have a beautiful target and they come in and they couldn't hit anywhere near it
Sometimes they get so frustrated that go down and the mischies would do this they weren't supposed to
We had our hard deck that we're supposed to and I get so frustrated that I go down and the trucks that they couldn't hit I go down and take out a couple of them with my two 20 millimeter cannons
And after giving that BDA I says and just before they'd leave frequency I'd pull up and say hey I got an addition to your BDA
Now we couldn't claim it for ourselves we'd all get fired but it's war and damn it this trucks are carrying bullets they're going to carry our kids in the south
You know it's worth taking a risk I thought and so by the way I want to revise your BDA you got two trucks killed didn't make any sense
But the so this new ideal is to bring up guys that you different aircraft that were you thought would have a better chance of hitting targets
Okay now we were frustrated about the ability to hit the targets and that was a big ongoing frustration we'd find it market accurately and nobody could hit it
Pretty fat
That's a side note happened once and I don't know why there was a flight of Navy A-4s off the Kitty Hawk
No man's and I never worked in Navy because you know I don't know what the Navy was doing in an Air Force area but there they were
And I had a what I looked like was a storage area and had bunkers and stuff look like there's fuel or ammo storage area pretty good target
And so wow A-4s would come up and no man would check in and you know they don't sound differently the Navy would sound different than the Air Force guys
So I said okay I got a bunker storage area and I described the target to him and I says okay you know we'll green him up, warm him up guys
Get ready to go because I'm in the mark so I pulled up went around put a nice mark in the target and I said okay hit my smoke
And I waited and waited and waited and finally the smoke excuse me started to dissipate and go away and ask him and I asked him I said hey you know man is there any problem do you see my smoke
He says oh yeah I saw your smoke misty but I was waiting for it to get the hell out of the way so I could see what the target was
I said I had never heard of that before I mean this is really strange the Air Force guys don't do that they just want to come up there and piss off their bombs and get their counters and go home early
Some of them and he says oh misty I see what you're looking at wow and now he took over you know normally the forward air controller we control the strikes and stuff
He says oh I know what it is he says oh okay and he described it to the other his flight and he says okay two you put your target your bombs there and three and so forth and he controlled the whole thing
And I'm sitting back and he says wow this is really cool and they did hit an ammo thing and it burned for a couple of days and I took some pictures of it and wrote a nice letter to the Navy for God's sake
And they invited us to the Kitty Hawk and we went out there and spent three days and combat operations off Yankee Station just because we wrote him a nice letter
It was really interesting these nomads another thing I found the Navy has a camaraderie between attack pilots and fighter pilots and it's big camaraderie
And they were hanging out with them for a while and they were wondering if they had an argument about something and he says oh Jake God damn it he says you're talking like a fighter pilot
And the guy says take that back you know and they're really arguing and say wait a minute I'm a fighter pilot you know what's wrong with that
But it was really a cool experience that we had with them
So anyway what we wanted to do this day is that now there's guys in that drop bombs in South Vietnam they're working troops in contact and you just don't piss bombs off around like we do up in North Vietnam
It has to be very accurate because there's troops in contact and there's other friendlies on the ground and the four air controllers in the South make great you know they go to great lengths that we don't go and bomb our own people
And so now these guys could really hit targets and so it's my buddy Chuck Shaheen in fact we were kind of high school buddies in some way we come from the same area around Dinova and we used to chase the same girls and so forth
So anyway Chuck had finished up his first tour he might have had I don't know maybe 60 sorties and I was working on 118 or 105 I guess mislead missions
And I had about five more to go before I was my normal rotation I says hey Chuck this year champagne flight hey how about two you know I'll go with you and you're back seat you know and I'll it'll be your champagne flight and it'll be a little article in the Orange Cove register that says two hometown boys complete combat tour and you know whatever a little blow up in some little po-dunk newspaper
But that's all it was going to be. So I had this this is going to be a test and so Chuck and I were going to go up there and find a target now these are in country guys they hadn't been to North Vietnam
And so I said now we got to find a real safe target for these guys you know some areas that you don't take newbies into them and some really intense area and so we're looking around for kind of a benign area and the best we could come up with is some god damn truck parked beside a harsh wall up there by a little river and a little road and this truck wasn't camouflage or anything
That should have been a clue right away. So finally we looked around and they said well this is about the best we can do but now this is a test these guys are the in country guys and they sent up some fighter weapons guys the guys been through the top their forces top gun school
Fighter weapons Nellis we call them patchwars guys with their patch that they've been through the top gun school guys were really good. So there were three of them then they come up and we briefed them and I guess they could see the truck and guys said okay leads in and he rolls in
He missed as bad as the F-4s did he pulled off missed the damn truck he saw best say I'm sorry I forgot to reset my altimeter well bullshit this is okay too and he had some other excuse that his mill his site didn't work right and he missed on
So the long and short of it is the three expert patchwars for bombing accuracy you know the first guys should have taken that truck out you know they could drop it right in the guy in the truck glove box if they wanted to what the hell is going on
So all of them all of them missed now right then our test was over and I should have stopped it right
I should have stopped it but however that damn truck was still sitting down there and that's when I'm going to take this to the book you say we couldn't bear to fail three passes same results and no 20 millimeter hits on the truck Chuck decided the misty fact should give it a
shot someone should have reminded us that when the 20 millimeter guns are beyond 3500 foot slant range the bullets just tumble and are rendered worthless until now we had all flown above 4500 foot hard deck unwilling to deny ourselves this stupid truck that seemed to be just sitting there taunting us Chuck went in
If the patchwars couldn't do it we would however we were we were the forward air controller not the fighter bomber and what we were about to do was in direct violation of standard protocol I checked the altitude indicator the three degree dive angle put us flat and right next right on top of the road
The karst cliff was now a blur close and right next to me we were low enough that I could even see the pebbles on the road this was a no kidding low angle Luke gun school strafe pass Chuck had the throttle in full burner burner real steady as only Chuck can fly
In the weeds now he opened fire and put a long concentrated burst of 20 millimeter cannon right on target I could not see the truck from the backseat but was certain he plastered it great we got some BDA the test was successful the champagne sweet even though the details were going to be fudged a
bit fudged hell in reality this mission was a total failure what happened in the next two seconds would nullify everything we had done Chuck came off the trigger and started a hard climb as the high G came on there was a loud bang under my right seat
it sounded as if Pete Rose had hit the bottom of the fuselage with a baseball bat and a home runs swing there was a whoosh as my rear view mirror was filled with fire when we pulled up I could see the fires glow on the cliff wall looking around I determined there were no good options for an ejection
I'm afraid it's Hanoi Hilton here we come the drop tanks had gone dry and Chuck called for a heads up as we were going to clean the wing and jettison the external fuel tanks pylons and rocket pods as we pulled up the other f 100s joined us and reported we were
torching and confirmed it wasn't an internal fire Chuck pulled it out of burner the and the angry red fire in the mirror changed to a white vapor the after burner flame had ignited the fuel stream and without it the fire choked itself out the fire was out but we were
hammering fuel at a prodigious rate there was talk about turning off generators transfer pumps looking for a tanker etc but no practical solution presented itself as we looked ahead at the coast coming up in the distance and watch the fuel gauge rapidly unwind it was
painful obvious the gauge would read empty before we reached long before we reached the water all we could do now was reflight the relight the after burner and use the remaining fuel for speed before it completely gushed out hoping we could still make it to the safety of the
gulf of Tonkin the guys on our wing looked closely to see if the fuel was running inside the fuselage where it might blow us out of the sky upon relighting the after burner they let us know it didn't look like it but there was no way to know for sure
fighter pilots like to fly close for some reason it seems the closer you get the more help you can lend a stricken comrad as we look down at the small farms of the coastal plain knowing farmers were waiting with machetes in hand this decision became a no brainer Chuck calmly called
okay we're gonna relight the burner we had never seen two wingman go from close fingertip to high forward spread root formation so quickly those guys got away from you Chuck mumbled something about candy asses and if those patchwares hit the damn truck we wouldn't be in this fix
he pushed the throttle outboard board and relight the burner the white vapor stream in my mirror again turned red with fire the wingman said no sweat it's only torching wow some torch it was only seven it was over 700 feet long we were accelerating in a slight calm
climb low on fuel with wings clean and going like stink I think we may have gone supersonic Chuck's decision to relight the burner was a good one and it looked like we might make it to the water pilot seemed to prioritize things only after returning to Foucat that I remember hearing a loud
rattlesnake sound in the headset and notice something on the glare shield our threat warning system was showing a Sam missile it was going wild surface to air missile launch flight panel was lit up like a Christmas tree we were for F4s flying straight and level to the
coast a perfect target but no one in our formation gave this warning more than a passing passing glance normally we would have we would have called Sam Sam and broken for the deck afterward the patchware lead told me yes I do remember that I just reached up and turned it off for some reason the enemy did not launch the
Sam's they probably thought we were going to die in the fire so why waste a missile I believe most warriors during times during the intense heat of combat resigned themselves to the likelihood that survival is improbable as I sat there watching the torrent of fire behind us the
unwinding full fuel gauge and the distant and that distant coast growing nearer deep in my psyche a small glimmer of hope emerged maybe we can make it we might actually get out of this alive not dead and not as POWs halfway to the safety the water I made a promise to
myself that if we could make it to the coast and eject and get rescued I would not be coming up here anymore this is my hundred and fifth misty sorty almost twice that of a normie normal misty tour no one could ever say I was a coward or a quitter my next action had to be done perfectly I
would be like to eject on that violent rocket seat riding up and out I studied and trained for each of the procedures I even joined a skydiving club and completed 50 sport parachute jumps I couldn't have been better prepared I'd always been paranoid about my personal
made it clear that no one else was to touch it, ever.
I would meticulously adjust the straps to my frame
since I had practical experience in skydiving.
I was well acquainted with the agony to the groin area
and the twins that resulted from an ill-fitting harness.
A perfect fit was critical and was always on my mind.
Prior to my ejection, I considered a few things,
but not in any sequence.
I remembered running out of fuel.
Chuck had the Hun in full afterburner
and we both watched the fuel gauge unwind to zero.
I always wondered how accurate those gauges were
and was about to find out.
As the needle passed empty, the engine quit.
This was not a sudden flame out,
but reminded me of a pilot slowly pulling the throttle
back to idle.
However, the RPM did not stop at idle,
but continued to unwind.
I recalled that there were a lot of towering,
cumulus clouds off the coast.
Chuck and I searched for an area to eject
and as soon as we spotted a break in the clouds,
we knew it was time.
The HC-130 Hercules search and rescue plane Crown 6
had just popped into view, which was comforting.
During the course of this entire catastrophic mission,
my cassette recorder had been running,
but I neglected to remove the tape
and put it in my pocket prior to ejection.
Bummer.
As soon as we made it to the Gulf,
I experienced an odd sense of calm.
I realized this would be my final combat mission.
This was the first time I truly believed
I would make it out of the war alive.
I was going home to see my family.
All I had to do now was simply eject and get rescued.
I had complete faith in my equipment,
but whether it was good and the Gulf glass smooth
and inviting was welcoming me.
Yes, this was going to be a piece of cake.
We had the ideal speed and altitude necessary
for a successful ejection.
I said, well, Chuck, it's time to go.
I reminded Chuck about the half-second delay on his seat.
He responded, no, if you go first, there's no delay.
I began to argue, but thought better of it.
Okay, now visor down, straps tight, elbows in,
head back hard on the headrest.
I closed my eyes, lifted the seat handles,
and while squeezing both triggers,
wondered what the next five minutes of my life would be like.
I wanted to avoid being anywhere near the Huns point of impact.
My rocket seat fired and the E-ticket ride up the rails
was slow, smooth, and wonderful.
It worked.
Once clear, I kicked the seat away from me
and my shoot opened with a jerk.
Looking around, I saw three F-100s, crown six,
and a couple of F-4s that had joined the orbit.
I looked around for Chuck, but didn't spot him
or a crippled Hun.
I could only assume Chuck had waited a while
and ejected inside a cloud.
I retrieved the survival radio, turned it on,
and expected to hear my shoot locator beeper,
but heard nothing.
I had made two emergency ejections in my lifetime
and the shoot beepers failed on both.
I tried to call, but couldn't work the damn thing
with my helmet on, so I put the radio away.
The next item was the four line parachute cut.
Sure enough, the conical C9 shoot canopy
would oscillate side to side
as air spilled out one side than the other.
I loved skydiving, was eager to test the four line cut.
Cutting four of the 28 lines would allow air to escape
in a controlled manner and stabilize the canopy.
I grabbed my government issued hook blade knife
and reached for the two shroud lines on my right
and cut them.
Next, I grabbed the two left hook, hook the knife around
the shroud lines, cutting those two clean,
but to my horror, there was another cut.
I had accidentally cut into one
of the four suspension risers.
I slowly turned to survey the damage
and saw the nylon web riser was cut 90% of the way through.
Had I cut it completely, the shoot would have collapsed
and I would have streamed it into the gulf.
My heart was in my throat.
My God, fly 155 Misty missions and die by my own hand.
I think Jonesy, the first Misty to fly 100 missions
did the same thing on his final mission bailout.
Do not give fighter pilots knives.
Much later, someone in the parachute shop got smart
and took away the knives from the flailing fighter pilots
and replaced them with a four line release system
that required no cutting.
Hanging in the shoot, I took one last look
at North Vietnam, remembering all that had happened
to me during the past eight months.
As the realization that I would not be returning to a cold,
I was flooded with an unanticipated sense of relief.
I remembered to deploy my raft in my survival kit,
but was so shaken from the knife and parachute episode
that I had forgotten to activate my underarm life preservers
until just before hitting the water.
Without them, the weight of the survival gear
would have pulled me straight to the bottom of the gulf,
sinking me like a brick.
I barely had time to inflate one side
as my feet hit the warm, clear water.
With no wind, my chutes settled right on top of me.
What a mess.
I struggled to untangle myself,
pulled the raft over and boarded.
I attempted to relax and enjoy the quiet solitude
as a new member of the exclusive Gulf of Tonkin Yacht Club.
It was amazing how clear the water was
and how good survival smelled.
Ha!
As I read these ejection stories,
I'm always surprised that you guys have time to think about it
and set it up kind of.
I always, in my mind, I always pictured ejections.
You get hit and you have a second and you just pull it and you go.
And you guys are sitting there thinking like,
okay, well, it looks like we're far enough.
We got it a good altitude.
You have time to think about it.
On this particular engine, there was a lot of time.
So, you know, we talk about the warrior ethic.
A real warrior, if he worries about making it home,
he's nowhere to shit as a warrior.
He might as well just stay home.
And if you're going to go up and do warrior-type things,
you have to accept the realization
that you're probably not going to make it.
And once you do that, then you can become an effective warrior.
You can focus on the job.
That's right.
On fire, burning out there,
and I thought maybe I was going to make it for the first time.
I thought, because I had this premonition about being captured.
In fact, I used to go down into our intelligence section
where they could get a lot of classified information.
And I was surprised about how much they knew
about the prisoner or war status,
even the interrogators and their name and the new guy village
and what was going to happen to you
and those rope tortures and stuff.
I was very, very familiar with that.
And it was like a premonition.
And when we got hit and pulled off, I thought, this is it, man.
What are they calling the rat or something?
And I said, well, I think I'm going to be able to meet the rat now.
And then all of a sudden, that full transition,
I think we may make it to the water.
And then for the first time, I thought, I'm going to make it.
And since I'd done two tours, almost two tours,
nobody would give me any problem.
I said, man, I found everything that I needed,
everything I wanted to know about, you know,
maybe it's the selfish thing.
Could I be one of those warriors?
Could I be one of those guys that flew those missions over
Nazi Germany when three out of four of them died?
Did I have the courage?
Could I really do that?
And I found out.
And having that information to me subconsciously
from my own personal psyche was really important.
And I learned a lot of other things, too.
I made a survey of some fellow fighter pilots.
And it says, the thing is, what happened when you first
started to be shot at?
The very first reaction, the very first time.
And we talked about it in the book a little bit.
The first reaction was the audacity, not that I'm scared,
not I'm going to drink away and duck down between my knees
or whatever.
It was the audacity of that son of a bitch that shot at me.
That's the first reaction.
And maybe that's, I don't know, maybe a right of passage
into being a warrior.
So what was the survey?
Oh, it was the survey that I, they were just mainly
fellow fighter pilots.
And I tried to ask some of the people that
were that had ground compact, Dike, you did, and John.
What was their reaction?
But I wasn't able to really, that was an informal thing.
I just wanted to know, was I unique,
or was this very, very typical of what happened when you first
get shot?
And I found that it's probably fairly typical,
that there wasn't any of the guys that I knew about,
that I flew with when they first got shot, that duck down
and screamed from my mother or whatever.
It was just the audacity.
And then if you survive that, you're a warrior.
And I would like to think that maybe that was a pretty common
thing, too, on all aspects of mortal combat
with your fellow men.
So that was your last combat operation in Vietnam.
So what happened after that?
I mean, after that, do they give you an option and say,
all right, you can head home now?
Well, I still had my one year tour.
And I only had about a week or 10 days.
Now, the misdeeds, if you're involved in something like that,
nobody give us any crap about our illegal hats
or illegal mustaches.
I saw a picture of your mustache.
It looks pretty good.
It's a tiny, illegal.
Any goddamn thing you want it to do.
There was always some spit and polish colonel
that would come up and give us a bunch of crap about things
that are not really germane to a combat operation
in the jungles of frickin' Vietnam.
I'm excited in my shoes or something like that.
And it says, OK, Colonel, why don't you?
It says, I'm scheduled for a misdi-1-1 in the morning.
Why don't you take my mission for me?
And I'll stay home and clean my shoes.
That's OK.
Cool.
So basically, if you are in an environment
where you're probably not going to make it anyway,
that was your mindset.
We did a bunch of other stuff.
We acquired our own DC-3, a whole DC-3.
And we go back and forth to Hong Kong anytime we wanted to.
Or we're supposed to have one R&R where you meet your wife
in Hawaii.
And the guys that were married, we'd go to Hawaii.
Well, we'd go in forged papers.
Or one of them was we'd go down to the personnel or the admin
off, and they had these forms.
And one of the forms was for emergency leave.
And so we got a real one.
And we looked at it.
And somebody had a typewriter.
And so we could copy that form.
Nobody ever checked on it.
I mean, it was an authorized form.
And so in my example, we made up authorization
in some colonels name.
And it would always have fun.
He could sign his name at the left hand or the right hand.
I mean, it looked official, but it was phony as hell
because we just made them up.
And I used one of those.
And I went down to the cargo area there at Foucet.
And I handed this.
And within 24 hours, I was back in the sack with my wife
and Sacramento.
This was after you got shot down?
No, no, no.
Oh, that was just normal.
It was during the eight months that I was there.
Right.
We just took this emergency leave.
Yeah, we'd go to Hong Kong if we wanted to.
Nobody mess with us at all.
The only thing that we couldn't forge was pay.
You're probably lucky you couldn't.
Yeah, but anything else.
Otherwise, you would have probably been in.
They probably would have caught that one.
No, they would have caught that one.
And that wouldn't have been right anyway.
But as far as anything else, we'd go and do whatever
the hell we wanted to.
And not only that, the Mrs. were known for, oh,
I've got to give you something too.
It's our calling card.
We could do whatever we want to.
So I went down and I spent seven days at home, which
was totally illegal.
You're not even supposed to go home at all.
But my emergency leave papers worked just fine.
And so in Travis Air Force Base, where my wife and my one
daughter was there, I went back and I gave them my
emergency leave orders.
And the dispatcher there at the military transport or a
mass terminal, he says, OK, you and your wife, go back and
have a nice steak dinner at the club and a bottle of wine
and come back here at 10 o'clock.
And you'll be on your way.
We've got a flight going out for you.
And so I did.
And like I said, less than 24 hours.
I think in 20 hours, I was back in Foucait.
I thought, I could almost commute to this thing.
So it was really a double make error.
We're misleads.
We do all this stuff.
Nobody's going to fuck with us.
On the ground or in the air.
Now, I'll show you my calling card.
You'll get a kick out of this.
It's two sides.
I think you could look at that and maybe read it.
So Side One says, get fact by a super fact.
Because they were the supersavers.
They called them super facts.
Get fact by a super fact called Misty.
For appointment, contact Hillsborough or Cricket.
What are those?
What's Hillsborough?
Those are airborne command.
Airborne, air traffic control for the one of another word.
Easy terms.
Flak free areas optional at extra cost.
Specializing in sands, trucks, supply areas, and rest caps.
Then on the other side, it says, do not make rapid movements.
This man is a trained professional killer hired by your government
to seek out and destroy enemies of the state.
He has nerves of twisted blue steel
and must be handled very carefully.
When done so, he becomes very docile.
You advise to give him the love and care he needs so badly.
Signed US Department of Defense.
You can keep that, please.
Outstanding.
So what happens?
So now the war's over for you.
The war's over for me.
And then I got sent directly to another war, that important war.
A war that if we'd lost, we'd lose our flight.
And that was the Cold War.
And then right out of the jungles of Vietnam,
I found myself sitting in the same F-100
with a one megaton thermoduclear hydrogen bomb
on the centerline pylon, sitting in a bunker with a target
someplace on the other side of the iron curtain for four years.
And were you stationed in England at this time?
Staged in England.
So how long, what's your schedule like?
Well, schedule, it was a three month rotation.
You spent a month at home, family and training.
And then we spent a month at Willis in North Africa
doing gunnery training, dropping bombs and whatever.
And then you spent another, then in the third month,
you ran a bunker someplace.
Just waiting to make the flight.
Right on the right next to the iron curtain
with a target on the other side someplace,
like in Turkey, more in Italy.
So that was the nighty day or this 30 day rotation.
Did you ever get spun up?
What was the closest you came to launching?
Did you ever get the call like, oh, it's go time?
Well, if you can imagine, there's 12 of us, 12,
we call them Victor Alert, 12 airplanes, hot cocked,
with a crypto code release from the president
to be able to arm that weapon and deliver it.
As you can imagine, nuclear weapons
are very closely controlled.
And rightfully so, I would say.
And I would sit on alert and I look up at that horn,
that klaxon.
And I thought, if that son of a bitch goes off,
the thing is that they didn't mess around with that.
It was either all out go or not go.
There wasn't any in between.
There was no drill or anything like this.
No, there was no, well, we'll drop a bomb and scare you
or something like that.
There wasn't any of that commitment.
And the whole thing was coordinated
from NATO to nuclear artillery right next to the FIBA
or right next to the Iron Curtain.
And then us were rolling stuff back.
And then the B-52s, they would come in for deeper penetration.
And it was all go.
And if they looked up there at that horn went off, I thought,
fuck.
There's no way to get back either.
It's all bullshit that you can come back.
But what am I going to come back to?
Yeah, and you know that, right?
I mean, you know if you launch on that thing,
that's the end of the world.
Like when we were in England sitting the word,
we were a nuclear delivery thing.
We had 12 active lines, 12.
They were in England when we were home for that 30 days.
And you know that if this thing started,
that that's a primary target.
And there's probably only 12 guys.
If this thing ever kicked off, there's
going to be 12 individuals at Lake and Heath Air Base
that are going to be alive.
Everybody else is going to be dying.
So you take off with an armed thermonuclear weapon.
And then you review them.
Everything that you know and love, your family,
your friends, everything disappears in a nuclear cloud.
And you often wonder, I got that son of a bitch.
It's in my centerline pylon and I'm really pissed off.
So we thought, well, we'd go upwind and bail out
over some Norwegian shored climb in a cave and wait
until all the radiation went away or whatever you can
visualize or something like that.
However, I lost more comrades in the Cold War
than I did in the Vietnam War.
From accidents, training accidents?
Or from what?
Well, a lot of it was highly classified.
The Gary Powers thing, the reconnaissance
and the RB47s did.
And there was a lot of other clandestine things
that even today they know nothing about.
Now, there's a lot of memorials.
This is one thing is my pet peeve right now,
is that there's Korea, all the wars.
Everybody has a monument there on the Mall.
And there's no monument about the Cold War.
And of course, there wasn't any battle line
and there wasn't any casualty report and stuff.
It's all classified and stuff.
And we won that damn thing.
We really did.
We won it.
And I can always say that I got shot down twice
once in the Cold War, the one that mattered
and then the Vietnam War.
Yeah, because you had another ejection.
Right.
What happened on that ejection?
Well, the saying was, you know a lot of it.
And what happens if you have a nuclear weapon on your aircraft
and you eject or would you never fly with a nuke, a live nuke?
No, they would never.
The tactical air command, the strategic air command,
B-52, Chromedome's, I think they did fly with fully armed nukes
ready to go.
And I think they quit that after they dropped a couple of them
inadvertently.
Anyway, that was an embarrassing thing.
During my time, we never flew them.
We flew with the dummies.
We'd go out and drop them on the range to see the accuracy.
But if you're dropping a really powerful bomb,
the only thing we would do, we'd ride on the side of the bomb
in grease pencil, something like, I don't know,
who the Soviet Premiers were, whatever.
Because there was one thing, you come at 500 knots right
on the deck at 50 feet and you pickle it off.
And then you try to keep going and getting away as far as you
can.
And you put the thing on the side and it said, well,
he says, well, Uncle Ho, what an Uncle Ho.
What the hell was it?
Whatever the Soviet thing was.
He says, you got three choices.
You can either run for 37 seconds
or you can dig for 37 seconds.
And the third choice is you can do any combination
of either one you want.
That's kind of sick humor.
So how did you eject again?
Well, I was on a test hop.
Actually, in England, I got kind of tired of going out
to what we call the Marsh Gunnery Range
and dropping little BDU-33 blue bombs, practicing.
And I wanted something of the little,
because I was a maintenance guy, had an A&P license
and I don't like maintenance.
And so I was going to go over and do the Chief of Quality
Control Flight Test Maintenance Officer, which
is really a neat job.
Because we got to fly the airplanes without the pylons
and without the drop tanks.
And they were clean and they were really a lot of fun to fly.
And the missions were short and very demanding.
And one problem, one thing, if you're a wing commander
and you want to get fired, we call them Victor lines, Victor
Alert lines.
And whether they're in commission or not is very important.
And if the wing commander wants to get fired,
he all he has to do is drop one of those lines
because of maintenance or some other thing.
Because when they check in every morning
down at whatever headquarters, all of his nukes
are ready to go and the pilots are briefed.
And then all of a sudden, there wasn't.
Now, the weather in England was really dog shit a lot of times.
And we were supposed to have VFR 500 and 5,000
overcasts and five miles visibility.
But it came up that there was a lot of maintenance
and the airplanes were coming out of maintenance.
And they were backed up because they couldn't get flight test.
And so it came to the point one day
that we were going to lose one of those nuklines.
Bad day.
Ooh, that was really bad.
And so in England, I think it was like 600 foot overcast
and drizzle and maybe two or three miles visibility.
And the vice wing commander, Colonel Herd, he come to me
and he says, hey, Dick, I know the weather's already bad,
but goddamn, we need this thing to replace it.
Or we're going to lose one of the Victor lines.
And of course, hell, I'm a combat guy.
I said, I can do anything, so go get them.
And so I taxi out and light the burner
and go down the runway, pull the nose up.
Now, it's really a fun thing because you can run
in full afterburner.
A full afterburner climb with an airplane without all the
ordnance on it.
Boy, it's really a sparkly little airplane.
And it's an afterburner climb to 40,000 feet.
And I break out on top over the North Sea at about 42,000 feet.
I can see.
So we have weather from 40,000 feet all the way to 600 feet
home.
And one of the tests is a negative G check.
And that's where some guys roll inverted.
I just pull up and then push it over to negative G
and all this stuff floats up.
And in the F-100, the canopy was designed in such an area.
Now, there's always dirt and crud and screwdrivers
and nuts and bolts and crap.
And it all ends up right over your head.
But just behind your head, and when
you come back to positive G, that it all falls.
And it falls together in all a very cleverly way
the physics of the airplane is.
And it goes right down the back of your neck.
Happens every time.
So I always had a collection of screwdrivers and wrenches
and stuff I found in the cockpit.
And I'd put it on the board and say, anybody, any mechanic up
there that would like to get it, they can come and claim their
ranch.
Of course, nobody ever claimed it and stuff.
So I did one.
I did one of those.
And when I came back to positive G,
I felt a horrible clunk.
I mean, a major clunk, just like the engine was loose or
something.
And I thought, god, what the hell is that?
And so this time, I got a lot more speed, pulled the nose up
really heavy, and really jammed the stick forward.
And sure enough, there was another big shift of weight.
It seems like right behind me.
Only this time, when I came back to positive G, the 42 PSI
normal operating position of the oil pressure went from there
to zero in a bat of an eye clunk.
And so now I had this big, huge clunk like the engine was
loose.
And I thought, well, maybe it pulled a wire loose because the
engine was running fine, that it had zero oil pressure.
Another thing, too, usually if you have a broken oil line,
the oil pressure will just kind of bounce around a little bit
and slowly decay.
But to go to absolute zero and then sprake it at the bat of
an eye, just bang zero.
And that's not normal.
And of course, you want to think it's not real serious
because where you are, and you finally think, I'm out over the
North Sea.
There's weather all the way to 600 feet at home.
And I says, OK.
So I practiced, I have to call Mayday.
Mayday, Mayday, Mayday.
It's a ring dub 2-1.
That's call sign.
Ring dub 2-1.
Mayday, Mayday, Mayday.
Where I am and what my problem is.
So I practiced a couple of times so I can get my really
cool Chuck Yeager voice.
And it took a while, too.
Because the first time I tried it in my headset, it didn't
sound very good.
So I got it really cool.
And one of the procedures is if you have zero oil pressure,
you don't want to jockey the engine back and forth.
You don't want to set the power.
And that means it'll run longer.
So I knew that I needed about 83% on final approach.
And an extra 20 knots to get level.
Because the F100 did not have a 0, 0 seat.
I think it was, but you had to get level.
If you were descending, you had no chance of making it.
And that extra 20 knots would get you level.
OK, half flaps, 83%.
And start down into the Merc.
And they had to vector me around a little bit for
identification back in those days.
Anyway, it took an extended period of time.
And I was telling them, I finally got on the GCA
controller.
And I says, look, give me transmission brakes.
Tell me you're on glide path, turn left, whatever the
dialogue is.
But give me transmission brakes in case something happens
in all that I can call you.
And of course, the GCA controllers, when they start
giving the instructions, they just clamp down on the
transmitter.
And so therefore, nobody heard anything at home when I was
on final approach.
Anyway, it kind of got a short, and I was really proud of
myself, a final intercept, glide path.
I lowered the nose.
Lowered the nose.
A half flaps had to gear down.
And hey, 83% was perfect.
They never jocked the engine at all.
This is really cool.
And I'm coming down in there, giving me the dialogue about
left and right on glide path and so forth.
And I just started to break out.
I couldn't see the runway, but I could start to see down a
little bit.
And I was thinking about, well, I'm rolling out of the
runway, and how am I going to write this thing up?
And so forth.
So then there was a grinding noise.
The intensity grew more and more.
And then it grew louder and louder and louder.
And then there was a huge explosion.
That's a compressor stalls.
And when a compressor stalls, then it shoots fire out both
ends of the airplane.
So there's this grinding and this huge bang and fire
shooting out in the front.
Dirt comes up in your face.
And now I'm looking for the, I call it the small corner of
time.
There's a small corner of time from here, just a couple of
seconds.
That corner of time, I can survive.
And if I'm outside of that, the ejection won't work.
That may not have hit the ground before.
And so to use every bit of that extra 20 knots that you have
on board to level off and eject, and maybe that the
parachute will open in time.
And so I did.
And I leveled off.
But then I looked down and there was a little town called
Brandon, right on the final approach.
And I could see the town right in front of me.
And I knew that if I banked the airplane, that it would
probably just bank and then ride itself and still go
into the town.
So this happened in just a couple of seconds.
I'm slowing down, coming back on the stick to slow down to
get in that small corner of time.
And I trim it.
Got the left trim going.
And reached down with my left hand and grabbed the handle
and pulled it up.
Whoops.
And pulled it up and it blew the canopy off.
And then immediately squeezed both tritters.
And knowing where that jet is going to be in a handful of
time, that is the most wonderful, smoothest
experience you'll ever have.
Is that ride up and out of that thing.
But the time compression is really interesting because as
the airplane was going up the rails, I thought there's going
to be an accident board.
And they're going to go through all the paperwork.
And I'm going to have to remember what I did for the
last three days when I drank.
And I'm thinking about all that stuff.
Going up the ejection rails.
And then I thought, my god, I had to put the colonel's name
on there.
And it's Herd.
Colonel Herd.
Is it H-E-R-D?
And I misspelled it.
And I thought, god, everybody in the whole world is going to
see that thing.
And on this paper, the flight plan or the clearance thing,
and I misspelled the guy's name.
How horrible.
That's all going through your mind.
See, it's still going up the rails.
And then the parachute opens.
And you can feel it as the canopy starts to open.
Not the shroud line.
Yeah, the right.
Not the risers.
But the shroud lines are all in there in their bundle.
And you can feel them coming off your back.
And then it opened.
And then it's opened.
And it happened so quick.
I looked straight between my legs, expecting just to look
down right into the cockpit.
Of course, that was ridiculous.
And I looked around and off my left shoulder, I could see
the airplane.
And airplanes flying along.
And now I'm low enough I can see the runway.
And for all the work, the airplane was going to
frickin' land on the runway.
I thought, boy, they're going to get, I'm going to get
frowned at for this.
Jumping out of a perfectly good airplane.
It lands on the runway.
And I did it.
And then the next thing I know, I'm in the trees.
Parachute comes down through the trees.
If you're going to bail out, pine trees are very nice.
Kind of smaller pines.
Because they're interlacing.
You come down through them.
And they bend just right.
And by the time I got to the surface, I ended up stopping
about an inch or two above the beautiful pine floor.
And then with another shake, then the parachute canopy
came down around my...
OK, now I'm right out of Vietnam, see.
And I've ejected.
And you're in the E&E training.
For a whole year, I've been training for escape and evasion.
Hide the parachute.
Get the radio.
Get that damn beeper off.
Which didn't work this time either.
The parachute beeper.
And I got to get the radio out.
But in England, we don't have the double radios and stuff.
And so right over there, there was an English guy in a
Koten tie.
He was out trimming the Queen's forest.
And his eyes were about big of saucers.
And he was looking, his eyes opened.
Of course, I come down and wear a nuclear alert.
And I have a gold visor on.
So here this guy comes crashing down through the trees.
And he said he heard the explosion.
He heard the seat come down.
And the canopy come down.
And then this guy's spacecraft with a golden helmet
come down right in front of him, basically.
And he's starting to back away.
I said, no, no, I need your help.
I need your help.
And yeah, come on.
Then I took the helmet off.
And then I thought, God, I got to call somebody.
My radios are normally in my vest in Vietnam.
But now they're in the damn seat kit.
One radio in the seat kit.
So the only way to get to it is to pull that handle on your
seat kit that you sit on.
It's got your raft and survival gear and stuff in there.
So I pulled the handle.
And a CO2 cartridge comes off.
And this yellow raft emerges out and making all this goddamn
noise right in front of this guy.
And he turns around and starts running away.
Where'd the plane hit?
The airplane came.
And it started a very left turn.
And it just missed the town.
It hit right in front of the plane.
It just missed the town.
It hit right beside Brandon, right across the road.
It didn't hurt anybody.
But it, you know, the typical fireball and stuff that
comes down.
And as I was pulling back, I says, it just blew it.
I'm getting out.
Now, nobody heard me.
Now, the colonel that was coming back from across country,
he heard me.
He's the only one that heard my call.
And so anyway, I took the helmet off.
And I ran and got him.
And I said, hey, I need your help.
And I brought him back.
And what the hell?
Oh, yeah.
Then I got down to the kit and opened it up and found the
radio and opened it up and turned it on.
And I called.
I made a radio call.
And for the time that it blew up, it was only about 93
seconds, that whole time that happened.
OK.
Now, I got a really good drinking buddy.
And he is the airfield support helicopter.
And it's called Pedro.
And Pedro is HH 43 and has intermission rotors.
And their whole mission is to have the Sputnik that hangs.
It's a big ball, firefighting stuff.
It's about as big as this table.
It's just fear.
And the whole thing is set up so the firefighters and their
aluminum suits, and there's a big fireball and burning and
the pilots inside, they've got to go rescue them.
So the rotor worst pushes it away.
And they take this Sputnik with their firefighting thing.
And they fight their way through the flames.
And they get in the cockpit.
And they pull the pilot out.
That's the whole thing.
And so now I didn't know about this, but nobody heard me
say that I was getting out.
And the end of the runway, the mobile controller.
His name was Jeff Coe.
Yeah.
In fact, he was a prisoner of war.
Yeah, I think he was.
I could be wrong about that.
But anyway, he said he's a mobile controller.
And so he starts screaming on the radio.
He says, get out there quick.
No shoot, no shoot.
There is no shoot.
I didn't see a shoot.
Get out there quick.
And he's screaming at the paid room.
And so the guy lifts off.
And he's in the helicopter.
And he's heading for the fireball out there.
It's going out.
And he keeps saying, the only thing that he saw was a landing
light came out of the weather and crashed into a big fireball.
So the guy, my buddy in the paid row, a helicopter, he's
out there.
He's going.
The guy's screaming at him.
He get out there quick.
And so he's going fast.
And for some reason, he thought he could get there
quicker if he pickled off that spudnik that he's hanging
below it.
So he pickled it off.
See?
Crash halfway to the wreck site.
And so he's coming around.
He's circling the wreck site.
It's all you see is a big, typical, crash site with
debris and fireball and stuff.
And he's thinking, oh, shut.
Now, that's Rutan out there, my best friend.
It's really terrible.
And then he gets out there in a minute or 93 seconds or
something.
I call him on the radio.
I says, hey, I'm down.
Come and get me.
And so now his first thought, he's circling this fireball.
And he thinks that I'm in there, right?
Calling for help.
And I call him.
And I says, get your ass out here and get me.
And then his whole thing, his whole training, everything
he's trained up for was that Spudnik thing.
And there's the fire in a classic situation.
And they're going to land and push the fire out of the way.
But he pickled it off.
And it's not there.
And he's heart sick.
He says, my god, I've screwed up.
Now, Rutan's going to burn alive down there.
And I could have saved him.
That's really bad.
And then he starts to realize, wait a minute.
There's no way that somebody can be alive in that thing down
there.
And so he calls.
And he says, he calls my name.
He says, Dick, is that you?
I says, yeah, get your ass out here and get me.
Thinking of Vietnam, I need to get rescued really quick.
And it's really interesting, this plaintive voice
that he said, he says, where are you?
I says, I bail out about a mile short.
He says, you bailed out?
You ejected?
And then you can understand the metamorphosis of emotion
that he's going through.
From the guy that's burning down there.
And I just jettisoned my firefighting equipment.
And now he's burning.
And he's calling me.
And I can't get to him.
And then the adulation of feeling, oh, he bailed out.
And he's OK.
And I says, yeah, get your ass out here and get me.
And so then he did come out and get me.
Of course, here you bail out, see.
And so there's the officers club.
And you've got to tell the story about everything.
And my squadron commander, Jake Engel, he comes up.
And he says, hey, he says, tell me.
I got a couple of questions.
He says, what were the indications?
You know, did the, you know, what?
We have a panel full of a lot of faults.
And a big master caution light comes on.
And then he says, oh, which one of those lights came on?
I thought, fuck.
You kidding me?
The only thing I saw was a big red master caution light
that was accentuated and confirmed by the fact
that there was a grinding noise and fire shot out the front.
And then that's all I remember, Jake.
And then I kept thinking about seeing that airplane flying off.
You know, there's a big pole sticking out of the canopy.
And I could see it.
And I could see the runway now.
And that horrible feeling.
And so I couldn't sleep that night.
So about 3 o'clock in the morning,
I called maintenance control.
I said, hey, you guys got the engine yet?
And they says, yeah, they just brought it in.
And it's in Hangar so-and-so.
It's on a dolly.
You know, you can go and look at it if you want to.
And in jet engines, it usually crushes part of the intake
or the compressor blades that spin.
As they're spinning, they can tell what the RPM was
that they crush.
And then they're bent back.
And they can have a pretty good idea of what
the power of the engine was.
And so it was really eerie.
And I got in the car.
And I went down there to mission control.
There's nobody on the field.
It's kind of drizzly.
And there's the Hangar.
So I drive up, open the door.
And sure enough, I look over there.
And there's the engine.
It's on an engine stand.
And excuse me, the top of the fuselage is still there.
And then the tail is all burnt and whatever.
So I walk over there to the engine by the side.
And I know they can tell the power on the engine
by the bent blades.
And there's the face of it.
So all you do is walk around and look at that.
So I stopped there for a little bit.
And you safety, or you have a horrible accident rate,
for some reason.
A lot of accidents and stuff.
The old F-100 engine, it had problems with it.
And so I thought, boy, they were going to hang me for this.
The first thing to do on an accident rate
is they blame the pilot.
See, it's pilot error, everything.
And I took a deep breath and I thought,
I'm going to walk around and look at the front of this engine
on the intake.
And then I'll know.
And that may be the end of my flying, on my career.
I jumped out of a perfectly good airplane.
So I went around and looked at the face of the engine.
And the blades, it crushed the intake
into a kind of a D-section.
So all the blades were straight.
And the ones that were, which crushed the blades,
they weren't rotating like that.
They were crushed straight in like that.
Zero power.
Zero RPM.
Zero RPM at impact.
And I thought, god.
Maybe there was something wrong with the engine.
And with that, it went back and had a good night's sleep.
So you end up doing other jobs in the Air Force.
Like you already talked about, you went and he had to go
and get your degrees.
And she didn't have a college degree.
Eventually, you retire from the Air Force.
And then after you retired from the Air Force,
and I guess even before you retired for the Air Force,
you were kind of doing some stuff with your brother.
You were starting this kind of crazy test pilot.
You were flying these little homemade planes
that your brother was making.
I threw a couple of those before I retired.
But then the retirement thing had a big problem
with the Air Force at this time.
And it was in the 70s.
And the military, at least the Air Force,
was permeated with drugs.
All kinds of drug problems and stuff.
And so the husband of the wing commander says, hey, Dick,
go down and take over the field maintenance thing.
You're a maintenance guy.
And I'll make you a squadron commander of a maintenance
squadron.
So I got 420 maintenance people.
And we do engine overhauls and break overhauls and stuff,
not crew chief stuff, but just kind of field maintenance thing.
And it was impermeated with drugs.
A lot of drugs with the people.
And there was a smoker.
And I knew that smoking was bad for everybody, for anybody.
And there was one guy.
We were anti-smoking, see?
Maybe that was kind of unique, because everything
was built around cigarettes and alcohol, the social environment.
There was one guy.
His name was Al Munch.
And he was smoking all the time.
And we're in the club, and then we're talking and arguing.
Typical Friday night BS.
And I says, Al, look at that.
I says, look at the cigarettes.
It's got you.
He said, nah, I could give it up any time.
I have a big argument.
I said, I'll tell you what.
I said, here's $10 bill.
I put it down on the table.
He says, you can't go 20 minutes without a cigarette.
Oh, yeah, oh, God.
And so, and I knew he couldn't, because he's addicted to addicts.
Anyway, he was a big addict for nicotine.
And it wasn't more than six or eight minutes later
that he came back.
He had a whole lung full of smoke,
and he blew it in my face.
And he took the $5 bill, and he threw it on the ground.
So anyway, I had a maintenance squatter.
And I said, there's going to be no smoking in my orderly room
or any of the buildings.
Well, that didn't go over too well with a lot of people.
And another thing, I had a third of my troops were female.
Female maintenance people, really good.
And but they would lock them up in the WAF barracks at night.
And they had some big WAF sergeant would control the.
What's a WAF?
Oh, women in the Air Force.
Yeah, that's right, women in the Air Force.
Anyway, there was a big sergeant that
would control all these women.
And they'd lock them up at night.
And my other squatter, and he had all the crew chiefs,
and they would sneak in and play with my WAF.
Getting in trouble, and he'd get caught playing with them
inside, sneaking in.
And so the Jag, and I had court martial authority.
And we were doing a lot of drug stuff.
People really hung out in drugs.
And even had a couple of general court marshals.
Guys trying to torch a building and sabotage my car
and attack me with kung fu darts.
This is really a mess.
And a lot of marijuana.
So I says, look, I want, I says, why in the world
are you going to lock up a third of my troops, females,
and all the guys?
They can run around downtown and raise hell,
but they have to stay in the Swap Barracks.
I said, that's, I said, look, I'm the commander.
They're my people, and I want them all in my barracks.
And they would say, Colonel Rutan,
do you have any idea what would happen if we put females
in the barracks?
I says, yeah, I know exactly what would happen.
In about 10 days, it would sort itself out,
and we'd be back to normal.
And they could have all the rights and liberties
that all the guys have.
And I'll put one corner downstairs that would be the Waf
ended.
Ended.
Oh, no, man, they wouldn't have to do that at all.
Well, there's no smoking thing in trying to unlock my Waf
at night.
Then I was throwing kids out of the Air Force for doing drugs.
Boy, there's some horrible stuff that
was happening to these kids.
But then what would bother me is I'd go to the commander's
reception sometime.
When commander, he'd have the other officers into his.
And I'd look out in the back at these receptions,
and the wives would be out there token.
They'd be smoking marijuana.
And I thought, I'm throwing kids out of the Air Force
for what the Wafs are doing back there.
And I looked around at the whole scene.
Now, I had a great combat record.
I had all my military training, command and staff
done, all those things.
I was on my way to be chief of staff.
And I thought, it happened just like that.
I turned around, and I went over to this orderly room
or whatever the thing was, CBPO.
And I says, I'm going home.
And I had 20 years and a microsecond.
Just enough for the retirement.
And that was another area of something
that I just wasn't ready for, the politics of that.
So then it went out and got ahold of my brother,
and we flew around the world.
Yeah, and that story is a crazy story of,
as you're going through this thing, as you get together
the money, and speaking of cigarettes,
at one point you get a tobacco company that's
going to sponsor the whole thing.
You won't take their money.
So you scrap this thing together.
You were talking earlier about the Voyager aircraft itself.
And this is cool, because I remember it.
Dave remembers it.
Dave probably remembers it better than I did,
because he was a little aircraft addict like you were.
Me, I just thought it was cool.
But the whole thing weighed like 500 pounds
or something like this.
And you guys took this thing.
You fly this thing around the world.
You got incredible details of that inside this book.
Sleep deprivation, it's not what, nine days it
took you to do this.
You get done with that.
You run for Congress out here in Calvary.
You got all kinds of stuff in this book.
You set a bunch of records, tried to go around the world
again in a balloon.
That was interesting.
Well, I thought, here I am successful around the world
and in other places.
I have to do something like that.
You're looking for what else can I do?
What else is out there?
Has anybody gone around the world in a balloon nonstop?
You end up saved by a parachute again.
Yep, that's right.
It bailed out of that thing.
Only this time it was fully funded.
So I got Baron Hilton and Pepsi sponsors.
They got a million and a half dollars
and built this pressurized capsule that was pressurized.
I could stay in the stratosphere, even sit on the moon,
close loop, life support system, the radios.
We launched out of Albuquerque about, well,
we had about a three hour delay on the launch, which
saved our lives, really.
And they launched this.
Baron Hilton cut the thing and sirens and patriotic music.
And we launched off or on our way around the world.
Anyway, at 30,000 feet, due to a design screw up
by the manufacturer, the balloon wouldn't vent.
So as it started to heat and expand, it wouldn't vent.
So it actually ruptured the balloon.
The helium envelope blew the whole bottom of it out.
Of course, a lot of big explosion,
but it's enough to bounce us off the floor when that thing
let go.
And now we're coming down.
And we launched out to fly around the world
and didn't even get out of the county.
That's an opportunity for character development.
I ended up in a Choya cactus patch.
Guy says, well, what are you going to do next?
I says, well, this is the first day of our second attempt.
And anyway, since there's only one first,
nobody gives a crap about who does anything second.
A guy, a Swiss watch company.
God, I don't want to say the wrong.
I think it was Breitling.
The Breitling Orbiter.
They took off in an incredible flight
at Taman Jones and Pertron Bacard, deed guy.
And I sat there and watched him.
And I even made the comment in public
that it was all very nice to be in competition with those
who have absolutely no chance of success.
Whoops.
So I don't know.
Copilot, he was not totally honest with me about parachutes.
And now real strong winds on the ground, like 40-mile-hour
winds in a parachute.
And if you don't do everything exactly right,
you're going to get hurt really bad.
And unfortunately, he wasn't truthful with me
about his parachute experience.
And so he jumped out first and got a good shoot.
But without knowing how to handle a high-wing landing,
parachutes are neat.
They'll save you life in flight.
A little killy on the ground by being
drugged across the desert.
And I ended up, I landed really,
started to step off your car at 40 miles an hour.
Your feet hitting it really flips you around.
Anyway, he didn't know anything about that.
He landed backwards and he got some severe injuries.
And I landed properly, going backwards.
And my helmet hit the ground so hard
I thought I was going to break.
And by the time I got both of those things jettisoned,
I was in a Choya cactus patch.
The jumping cactus, little needle herbs, this thing.
And I was looking through my, looking through
the cactus in my face at our million-dollar balloon.
Of course, it would hit and knock off some of the propane
tanks and go back up again and hit again.
And it discharged different stuff and finally
hit a power line in Texas and it burned to the ground.
Well, that one burned to ground.
But you had already made it as the first person around the world
without stopping or refueling with the Voyager, which
is an awesome story inside this book.
And you've talked a little bit about it on the podcast.
But to get the full story, the book lays it out,
all kinds of issues you overcame.
Just an incredible story.
And one of the many reasons you were inducted
into the Aviation Hall of Fame.
And I mean, the stories in the book, they're just incredible.
If you're listening, definitely just order this book.
And we've been talking for a pretty long time now.
I don't want to take up forever.
But Dave, what do you got?
You got any questions?
I got all sorts of questions, but I mostly just
enjoyed listening.
We're three and a half hours into this almost.
And I'm just captivated here in the stories.
And I routinely get to say this because I
get to sit over here off to the side when
Jaco does these podcasts.
And I just get to watch people have these conversations.
But the aviation conversations are unique.
And they're special to me because I
could picture a lot of the things you're talking about.
I could picture the way you're describing them.
But unrelated to that, I've been sitting here
thinking this whole time about a saying that,
and I think it's some phrases as don't meet your heroes,
something like that.
Which I think is like some catchphrase that says,
well, don't meet your heroes because when you meet them,
you're going to be disappointed because you've created
this image you've had of them in your mind.
Well, I've gotten to meet several of my heroes
and never once, never once have I been disappointed.
But what's unique about this for me, sir,
is that all the other people I've ever met,
I can only read about them in books
and hear about the things that they've done.
But I know you because I got to see what you did.
I was old enough and we were modern enough
that what you did in that airplane in 1986.
And I can vividly remember the three loops you did
over Mojave when you landed and getting,
I can picture that as a teenager,
already captivated by airplanes.
So to get to sit here with you, knowing who you are,
not from books, but from actually seeing it happen live
and in person, this is just an absolute remarkable day
for me.
So I can't thank you enough for letting me be part of this.
This has been awesome.
I am honored to have met one of my heroes today.
This is good stuff.
Thank you very much.
This, my brother come up and he says,
with the advent and availability of,
it reminds me of an opportunity I had to meet the king,
the now king of England.
But anyway.
Well, what happened when you met the king of England?
Well, I called him, hey, Chuck,
and I didn't go over too well.
As a fellow fighter pilot.
I met about Americans, they'll bow down to royalty
in any case, I'm an American.
Hey, Chuck, well anyway.
The Bert said that with the availability of carbon fiber,
he thinks it's possible to build an airplane light enough
that it'll carry enough fuel to go around the world.
Now, the airplane took off, these are round numbers,
10,000 pounds, 3.6 tons of aviation gas,
3.6 tons.
The carbon fiber structure weighed 926 pounds
and a wingspan bigger than a Boeing 737
and a cockpit half the size of one of the restrooms
on the 737.
But all of that, that 926 pounds had to carry 3.6 tons
of fuel, two engines, avionics, radios, two hearty souls,
little food and water and launch off.
I, it's one of the things that you get on a train one day
and you realize the train's going off a cliff
and it's too late, you can't get off.
You know, five and a half years, I've told everybody,
hey, we're gonna fly around the world, help us out,
have no money, volunteers,
begged and borrowed quarter million dollars
with a carbon fiber, half a million dollars
with the avionics and radars back in those old days
with no GPS and so forth.
A mission control system and set that whole thing up.
And I describe it in the book, the first part
of the next five minutes.
And I named the book because how many times in my life
have I sat in a cockpit and wondered what the next five
minutes of my life was gonna be like?
And there had been a number of places.
And we haven't even talked about some of the flight test
stuff that we did with birds airplanes.
But the book starts with trying to put the thing
in perspective, what did it feel like?
But I first started going out and giving my talks,
my wife, and I met her after the flight.
She listened to a couple of my lectures
and now I'm kind of a technical person.
And I think it's important that my audience knows
how many fuel tanks we had and how we sequenced them
and how the L over D and all that other stuff.
And finally she come up to me and she says,
Dick, she says, nobody gives a frick about how many
fuel tanks.
And so I want you to tell them what it felt like.
And so I changed the whole tenor of the book.
And it wasn't, the book's not written for aviation
as you can tell, it was written for to try to talk about
challenges and motivation and some of the emotional
challenge that we had along the way.
And trying to set that up and the book starts with
I'm sitting in the end of the runway.
That was Air Force Base that morning.
We had roughly 25% more fuel than we'd ever had
on board before, much less flight tested.
The airplane was, of course there wasn't much to it
so it's pretty flexible and it could bend.
And I'm sitting there thinking because the two and a half
years of flight tests and the 69 flights,
we had some horrible emergencies.
Many, many, many days.
The propeller blade came off and it ripped the engine off.
It was just hanging in the bottom of the cowling
and flight control problems.
And ran into some rain and almost one of the airfoils
and the airplane didn't like rain and we found out
about it the hard way and we just barely flew out
of the rain in time to save.
I mean, there was numerous stories about that
that's in the book.
But trying to set up the situation that I'm sitting
at the end of the runway, what am I thinking about?
What's gonna happen?
Trying to remember some of the stuff that's happened
ahead at the time.
And another thing is people are really interesting,
interpersonal relationships.
I met, I separated from my first wife
and later on I met another girl.
Her name is Gina Yeager.
And we had a big and romantic thing.
And at the time we met, Bert says,
hey, how about doing this around the world thing?
Wow, okay.
Bert, you designed it and Gina and I will fly this thing
around the world.
We're off on this five year odyssey, this romantic odyssey.
And it was really good.
I mean, some of the most interesting times in my life.
But then for some reason she decided to,
well, she got out of the bed and went into the other bedroom.
And I didn't have enough time to replace her.
And there was a whole bunch of pressure going on.
So all of a sudden we're, we're have this romance ended
and we weren't even talking to each other.
And now we got to go and fly around the world together.
And the fact is that it takes two pilots to do that.
You know, you take turns, but she couldn't fly the airplane.
She didn't want to learn how to operate
in any of the systems.
I kept saying, damn it.
I can't do this thing by myself.
I need to have another pilot.
You need to burn this, but you wouldn't.
And I says, if you don't learn how to run and set up
the nav systems and all the other complicated things
about this airplane, I'm going to replace you
with an actual pilot.
And she looked at me and says,
you either take me or I'll burn the airplane.
So my choices were two and one of them would have been in jail.
And so when we, the two of us climbed into that airplane
that day, that morning at Edwards Air Force Base,
I had no idea how we were going to do this.
Ha ha ha ha.
What did you think your percentage chance of success was?
Well, none.
It was all set up.
It was to go.
It didn't have enough time to fix any of these things.
The weatherman came up one day and he says,
you know, we've been working really hard on this thing
to get all the systems, the mission control,
the weather, the communication systems, the worldwide,
all this stuff had to be set up.
And it says that, and the weather was terrible.
And we had missed the weather window.
And it was in December and it was outside of the weather window.
And the weather guy, Len Selman, comes up and he says,
hey, Dick, he says, well, we missed the weather window.
We have to wait till next year.
And I said, all of this stuff that we're borrowed,
all these big, huge computers and communications,
these systems are all borrowed.
And I didn't know if I could get all that equipment
back in a year and all the people back in a year.
And I looked at him and I says,
Len, I says, the airplane's not ready yet.
It's close.
He says, when the airplane is finally ready,
I'm gonna walk outside.
It's a metaphor.
So I'm gonna walk outside.
And if it's raining, I'll wait.
And if it's not raining, then I'm gonna go.
I says, you go back in your weather thing
and you find me a way around the world
outside of the weather window.
And next day he comes back and says,
hey, Dick, I think I found you away, except for one thing.
Can't get you across Africa.
And the map, look at the world map, big, wet maps.
Africa's only this bit.
I'm worried about that when we get there.
Profound, as you see in the movie.
So anyway, I wanted to rest when the airplane
is finally ready and all the people sign off,
not metaphorically, they say that it's ready.
The engines, the systems, everything is ready to go.
Refueling, and bousers are ready at Edwards Air Force Base.
The press has been notified.
I thought, when that's done,
Jane and I, we can go up in the sears and just rest.
Needed to have some rest, just to be ready.
And when it was finally ready the next morning,
we had a weather briefing that was either go or no,
go at 10 o'clock.
And I walked into the weather briefing
and Lynn Stelman, the weather guy comes in
and he's smiling, I thought, oh shoot.
And he's telling me, but during the briefing,
I realized that the weather is perfect for departure,
except for Africa.
And I thought, God, I'm just one day off.
I could just go and get my head clear.
One day is all I wanted, but there wasn't.
And it's just like General Eisenhower,
when it was gone D-day, they all looked at him
and said he had to say go or no, go.
And I says, okay, let's go.
And in 10 seconds, I was alone in the room,
everybody had left.
You know, it's all choreographed,
when the engine starts, take it over there,
set it up at Edwards Air Force Base, the fuel bousers.
And we had the last supper with the family.
Then I thought that here I am, I should have the VIP quarters.
The VIP quarters up at Edwards, then I didn't check on it,
I trusted somebody else to do that.
Well, they didn't, they didn't know anything about it.
And so I ended up in a real old barracks,
kind of one step up from an open bay barracks.
And those things, they have central heating
and the ducts whistle and they make a lot of noise.
And this, go in this room and it's bare.
And it's an old military bed with the steel thing on it.
And it's just a terrible thing.
I thought, God, I asked the driver, I says,
well, hey, there's the VIP quarters over there.
You know, here I'm gonna fly around the world,
at least somebody, he says,
that he didn't even know anything about that.
God, that's, okay.
So I'm laying in there and listening to that.
And of course, you know, it's a wake up in a handful of hours.
And I'm laying there and it's hot
and I'm trying to get some sleep.
And all of a sudden there's a knock on the door.
I thought, knock on the door, who in the hell is this?
So I'm really pissed.
I get up, open the door and I fly surgeon,
Dr. George Jutland is there.
He's our flight guy for all of our medical stuff.
And I said, George, what are you doing?
And he says, oh, Dick, I forgot.
And he had a little box.
You know, like the children's milk cartons,
they're, you know, they're open them up and stuff.
He says, I want a urine sample when you wake up.
And here's the box that I want you to do it.
And I thought, George, you woke me up.
You woke me up to give me a box to piss in.
And then I was really pissed.
I was so keyed up about that.
I don't think I slept in the,
finally the wake up time column.
And we went out and called in the board of airplane
with no sleep per se and a copilot
that wouldn't talk into me.
It didn't know how to do run any of the systems.
And we took off having no idea
how in the hell I was going to do this.
And we thought about all the stuff we'd gone through
in the last five and a half years.
And then it was time.
And I thought, you know, Dick,
you're probably going to be dead in the next five minutes.
What you really ought to do right now
is shut the engine down and open the little canopy
and get out and walk out in the desert.
At least you'll be alive tomorrow.
And then I thought, wait a minute,
I ask all these people all these years
to come and help me.
And a lot of them sacrifice quite a bit.
Some of them even lost their jobs and come and help.
Had I done that, they would have had every right
to chase me down and commit premature euthanasia
for some damn coward that totally deserved it.
So I said, there's no way out.
There's no way.
So that morning, trepidation,
I pushed both of the throttles wide open,
released a little tiny break like a foot on a nose wheel
or something, foot on a skateboard.
Because breaks are really heavy,
so we didn't take any breaks.
And that thing lumbered down the runway.
And it accelerated, yeah, there was an acceleration checkpoint.
And I put more fuel on board the airplane
than what the designer wanted.
And Eve was really mad about that.
But I was worried about running out of fuel.
I always had this nightmare that run out of fuel
100 miles short, hell of a record,
but we still failed on first around the world.
So he put up some flag markers down the runway.
And he says, Dick, you need to have this specific airspeed
as you cross each one of the markers.
And because you don't really have wheel brakes
on the airplane, to be able to stop
before you run out in Edwards Dry Lake,
you need to have these target airspeed as you cross them.
Well, he didn't know it, but Dick was really tired.
He had been at this thing five and a half years
and all these emotional things with my girlfriend
plus all the other things that we had to deal with.
The only thing I wanted,
I just wanted this frickin' thing over with.
And I didn't care if I was on fire.
I wasn't gonna quit.
So I had to give him a blood oath to my brother,
okay, I'll do that, promise, promise, no one full will.
There's no frickin' way I'm gonna quit.
I want it over with.
I just, you get to that point.
And so we started accelerating.
As the flag markers came by,
we were starting to get one knot low, two knots, three knots.
And at midfield, the last marker,
we needed 86 knots.
Yeah, 100 knots for takeoff, 86 knots.
And I was four knots low.
So I keyed the mic button.
It says we're four knots low at midfield.
And nobody said anything.
I think everybody knew there was no frickin' way
I was gonna quit.
Besides that, the airspeed indicator's over here, see?
And here's 65.
It only had to go a little bit farther to 100.
A little bit more.
Just a little bit more.
This is all I have to,
and I looked down at the end of the runway,
it's still a mile and a half away.
I said, shoot, there's no problem.
Not knowing that the faster you go,
the more rapid you consume the runway.
And so we hit our rotation speed,
and I gave it three more knots from mom.
And the wingtips were dragging on the runway.
And I reached up and grabbed that control stick,
and it says, well, Dick,
if you've never been smooth in any time of your life,
you better be smooth now, because this is the big one.
And I reached down there and started pulling back on the stick,
and the canard lifted, and the boom tank
started coming up, and I could see the wings come up
slowly, slowly, slowly.
And I swear to God, they were gonna touch over my head.
And with 95% of that world's longest runway, it lifted off.
And actually, I have the video,
if you wanna look at it, or see it, or include it,
but the wings came up real slow, and it lifted off,
and it flew in ground effect,
and it finally got to 100 knots.
And if it got to 100 knots,
we had enough power to climb.
And so we shook off the wingtips, which were damaged,
lost three foot of wingspan.
And they were talking about aborting,
and I says, there ain't no fine way I'm gonna quit.
They're just not gonna quit under any circumstances.
I don't care what's wrong with the airplane,
it could be on fire.
And so we turned and put W in the compass.
And metaphorically, I held W in the compass
for nine bloody days, and looked up without turning around.
And there was Edwards Air Force Base ahead of us.
I guess the world is round.
It's still amazing to me that normally,
if you fly a long ways to get home,
you gotta turn on a comeback.
But if you just keep going in the same direction
and you get home, it's still strange.
I guess maybe the world is round, but I know one thing.
It's a bloody long ways around the world.
The world is 25,000 miles at the equator,
or just under that.
The Voyager actually flew 26,358 statute miles unrefueled.
We got home with one half of 1% of our takeoff fuel.
So we just barely made it back.
But that morning, it was beautiful in the LA Basin
at the high desert.
Tens of thousands of people came out.
And cars were lined up all the way back in the Lancaster.
And a lot of people.
And somebody says, hey, Dick, if you orbit for 20 minutes
more, you'll have an even nine days.
And I always thought, well, that would sound better.
And so we orbited around and flew over the crown
and said things like, hey, Dick, what time is it?
They says, well, it's Miller time.
You only go around once.
That was the beer at the time.
Another one says, Dick, what are you gonna do now?
I says, going to Disneyland.
And Eisner was the head of Disney at that time.
And his wife said that that was the first time
that that thing had ever been said in public.
And then I said after that, no one that,
that I invented that or whatever,
that I guess Joe Namath or some football player
that won the Super Bowl.
And he says, what are you gonna do now, Joe?
Or whatever his name was.
Well, I'm going to Disneyland.
Well, they probably paid him $50,000 to do that.
Didn't pay me anything.
But that day it went out and we put the landing gear down
and it was gonna land in the dry lake.
I mean, we were so light then
it could have landed on my briefcase.
But it was gonna land at Edward's Air Force Base
in the famous Murat dry lake.
And so we came around.
And another thing I was worried about
is on the dry lake, there's no depth perception.
And I had basically been awake for nine days.
I sat in the seat for three nights, four days, three nights.
Going into the fourth night, I says, even Dick,
you can't do this, you gotta get some sleep.
But I couldn't put her in the seat.
Because when we were heavy, if the autopilot kicked off,
the airplane itself was struck in 15 seconds.
And I couldn't get to the controls.
So we had to wait till we burned off in the fuel
that it would dampen it, dampen itself out.
So we came around and touched down
a good buddy, Mike Melville, he counted it down
to five to four, three, one touchdown
on aviation's hallowed ground.
You know, we're Chuck Yeager and Scott Crossfield,
chasted demons in the sky.
What an honor to be able to land in that place
and taxied up to the crowd
and shut off those engines that had run for solid
for nine days.
And I looked around at everybody
and I set my head back a little bit and I closed my eyes.
And it felt every bit as good as I had imagined it
for the last five and a half years.
And the airplane hangs in the National Air and Space Museum
in the mall.
Well, I think they're doing some renovation
that had hung there.
You know, it's a tribute to a couple of things,
to the freedom that we have in our country.
And also that if you can, like mom says,
if you can dream it, you can do it.
And the only way to fail is if you quit.
It managed the motivation.
And in the book there, when President Reagan and Nancy
presented to us the citizens medal,
just a couple of days after the flight,
they're in Crystal City in Los Angeles.
There was some species given.
You know, Bert and I said something
and Gina said something and the president said something.
But we got to meet them and get acquainted with them
about who they were.
And when we first met in the anti-room
before we went on stage to accept the medals,
we started talking and we were nervous
we're going to meet the president.
And as we sit there and started to talk a little bit,
where we were, we reversed positions subconsciously.
And I realized there as nervous as we were.
This is the presidency.
And we got invited to Washington and had dinner
a couple of times in a state dinner,
sitting at the same table with Ronald Reagan,
what an honor that was.
And he is every bit.
And in the book, I found the transcripts
of the words that we're saying.
And I read them today, I says, I said that extemporaneously.
But it turned out really well.
And especially it's all done because like we talked
during that presentation with the president about freedom,
how precious that is.
Well, no doubt about that.
And the book definitely spells that out.
And just the whole story is incredible.
Your story is incredible.
I want to close out with something
that you write in the book.
Something you write in the book about your best friend, Howard
K. Williams.
As we talked about earlier, you call Howie.
Again, he was shot down in Vietnam.
It was there was a lot of unknowns about what
had actually happened to him.
You had that mystery phone call.
And it wasn't until 1992 when his remains
were recovered by the POWMIA Resolution Task Force.
And as you mentioned earlier, you attended the service.
And you wrote about that in the book.
You say, Howie's military funeral at Arlington National
Cemetery was an impressive ceremony
with full military honors befitting a fallen hero.
The POWMIA name brace that's worn by his friends and family
were ceremoniously added to the grave.
As I turned to leave the grave site, I saw Howard's son.
He was only four or five when I had last seen him at Luke.
But at this moment, I couldn't believe my eyes.
He was the spitting image of his father.
My buddy would have been so proud of his boy.
Future visits to Washington DC would always
find me at the Vietnam War Memorial.
That symbolic black granite wall contains
more than 58,000 names of fellow warriors killed
and missing in action.
I run my fingers over the name of one of America's best
and one of my very best friends, Howard K. Williams.
Each time I stand before his engraved name,
I swear I see his reflection smiling back at me
from within the dark granite surface.
I continue to miss him.
And for all these years, I have wondered what really happened.
I recall the comradery and fellowship
of the fledgling fighter pilots off
to test their skills in mankind's epitome
of human competition, deadly combat.
And I thank them, especially Howie,
for their sacrifice that allows me to live a full life.
So, sir, thank you.
Thanks to you and all your comrades
that served and sacrificed for our freedom.
Well, thank you.
Look at it as a fellow warrior.
There's just one thing.
There's an individual whose name is Jeremiah Denton.
And he spent many years as a prisoner
of war at the North Vietnamese.
And when they picked him up and he got off the airplane
at Clark Air Force Base after enduring all of that,
they asked him, there was a microphone set up.
And if he wanted to say a few words.
And he gets off the airplane.
He looks around for his first two or three steps on free soil.
He walked up to the microphone and he said something
to me so profound that it epitomizes fellow warriors.
And now I'm going to say it, but I'm going to choke up
because I can't try to imagine what he had gone through
and the words that he spoke that morning at Clark.
And what he said was, I consider it an honor
to have had the privilege of serving my country
under difficult circumstances.
And I think, God, as long as there's that kind of people
that look back on that whole thing as an honor
to serve his country.
And I think as long as there are those people,
our flag will still be free.
Yes, sir.
Yes, sir, indeed.
And I don't think I can say anything else beyond that
other than thank you.
Thank you, John.
It's an honor to be here.
Thank you.
And with that, Dick Rutan has left the building.
Also, Dave Burke left the building.
He's escorting.
He's escorting Dick Rutan back to the hotel.
They're probably going to sit and talk about flying for a while.
So just incredible story.
Obviously, read the book, get the book.
The next five minutes, it's called.
It's just incredible to be able to sit here with a guy like that
and hear these stories just rolling in to North Vietnam,
tracers everywhere, locking locking eyes with those enemy
fighters trying to kill you and doing that day after day
after day after day after day after day after day.
That's the American fighting spirit.
So thanks for listening.
If you want to support the podcast, go to jocofuel.com.
We make the best, cleanest, most effective supplements
to put inside your body.
So go to jocofuel.com and get some of that.
If you have a wah-wah near you, you have a vitamin shop,
military commissaries, Hannaford's, Dash Stores
in Maryland, Wakefern Shoprite Circle K,
HEB, of course, down in Tehos.
Murphy's down in the Southeast and Meyer,
Meyer in the Midwest.
Go get Jocofuel.
It's a great way to support the podcast, what we're doing here.
And it's a great way to support yourself.
Don't forget about originusa.com.
Go get your Hunt gear, Jiu Jitsu gear,
Rashgards, Gies, T-shirts, Boots, Delta Jeans.
Get yourself some Delta Jeans from originusa.com.
You can also get stuff from jocostore.com.
Got all kinds of stuff to get, I guess.
Get yourself a bunch of cool stuff from jocostore.com.
And you guys know the rest, man.
Subscribe to the podcast.
Check out jocor underground.com.
We got the YouTube channel.
We got psychological warfare.
A bunch of books.
Again, the book, the important book for today
is The Next Five Minutes by Dick Rutan.
Just an awesome book, an awesome read.
You know about Jocopublishing.
We got a bunch of books.
Only Cry for the Living by Holly McKay.
I've written a bunch of books.
You can check those out as well.
Kids books, Way the Warrior, Kid 1, 2, and 3.
Get some of that.
Ashlam Front, look, these principles that we talk about.
About combat.
They also apply to everyday life, to business.
And we talk about those.
And we teach those at Ashlamfront.
Ashlamfront.com for details.
Come to one of our live events so that these lessons get
shared to get passed on.
We also have the Online Training Academy
at extremotorship.com, where you can learn this stuff online.
You don't need to go somewhere to get this information.
And also, if you want to help service members active
and retired, you want to help their families.
If you want to help Gold Star families, check out
Mark Lee's mom.
Momily, she's got a charity organization.
And if you want to donate or you want to get involved,
go to americasmightywarriors.org.
Don't forget about heroesandhorses.org.
You got Micah up in the wilderness, helping people
find themselves.
Yep, Dave Burke's on Twitter.
He's on the gram.
He's on Facebook, at Dave R. Burke.
I'm there to add Jocowilink.
And thanks, once again, to Dick Rutan for joining us,
for sharing his lessons, learned to share
in these incredible experiences.
And thanks to him and to all the other military aviators
that rule the sky and give us dominance.
And they pay a heavy price for it.
And thanks to the rest of our military personnel, who also
pay the price every day to keep us safe and protect
our way of life in this great nation.
And the same goes to the police, law enforcement, firefighters,
paramedics, EMTs, dispatchers, correctional officers,
border patrol, secret service, all first responders.
You all keep us safe here at home.
And we thank you for that.
And to everyone else out there today,
you heard what Dick Rutan said.
And he talks about it in the book.
He talks about what his mother would tell him.
And at one point in the book we didn't cover today,
he talks about sometimes when he was facing
an seemingly insurmountable problem or challenge,
he would run.
He would go and run to clear his mind.
He'd do it for physical fitness, but he did it to clear his mind
to gain perspective.
And sometimes he says in the book,
he would chant that cadence that he spoke of,
that he learned from his mom, which is, you only fail
if you quit.
And that is the truth.
So go out there.
Don't quit and keep getting after it.
And until next time, this is Jaco.
Out.